Automotive segment The core BMW brand caters to a broad array of customer requirements, ranging from fuel-efficient and innovative models equipped with Efficient Dynamics to efficient, high-performance BMW M vehicles. At the same time, the BMW Group continues to redefine the boundaries of premium with BMW i. With an even greater focus on innovation and sustainability, BMWi embodies the vehicle of the future, with electric drivetrain, intelligent lightweight construction, exceptional design and newly developed mobility services. The MINI brand is an icon promising supreme driving pleasure in the premium small car segment. Rolls-Royce is the strongest brand in the ultra-luxury segment with a tradition stretching back well over 100 years. Rolls-Royce Motor Cars is specialised in bespoke customer experiences and offers the highest level of quality and service. The global sales network of the automobile business currently comprises around 3,400 BMW, 1,580 MINI and 140 Rolls-Royce dealerships. Within Germany, sales are conducted through branches of the BMW Group and independent authorised dealerships. Sales outside Germany are handled primarily by subsidiary companies and by independent import companies in some markets. The BMWi dealership and agency network currently covers more than 1,500 locations.Research and Development A major factor in the success of the BMW Group is its consistent focus on the future. A long tradition of innovation is not only the basis of the BMW Group’s economic success, but an integral part of its corporate philosophy. Shaping individual mobility and finding innovative solutions today for the needs of tomorrow is a key driving force for the BMW Group. Research and development (R&D) are therefore of key importance for the BMW Group as a premium provider. With its Strategy NUMBER ONE > NEXT, the BMW Group is focusing on the topics of electric mobility, digitalisation and autonomous driving. The key trends of individual mobility are summarised at the BMW Group in the term ACES (Autonomous, Connected, Electrified, Services). Accordingly, the BMW Group’s R&D activities include the following four topics: 1. Autonomous Since 2017, the BMW Group has pooled its development expertise in the fields of vehicle connectivity and autonomous driving at its own development centre. More than 600 BMW Group employees are now working in cooperation with other partners at a campus near Munich, thereby developing and expanding the open platform for autonomous driving. By the end of the expansion, more than 2,000 employees will be working at the new site towards achieving fully autonomous driving in fields ranging from software development to road testing. 2. Connected The second strategic direction is summarised under the term Connected Drive, an integrated digital concept in which the driver, the vehicle and the outside world are all able to interact with one another. The vehicle can be attuned to the individual needs of each driver, thus making it a smart companion. In future, transferring certain tasks to the vehicle will broaden the range of options available to the customer when driving. The time saved can be used for other purposes. This results in increased comfort for the driver and greater safety for road users in general. Numerous safety and comfort features already exist in BMW, MINI and Rolls-Royce brand automobiles as well as BMW Motorrad brand motorcycles. In 2021, the BMW iNEXT will take to the roads with an electric drivetrain and full connectivity. It will also reach a new level on the way to autonomous driving. 3. Electrified One of the strategic objectives of the BMW Group is to continuously optimise the energy efficiency of automobiles and motorcycles, including electrification of the product range across all brands. Under the term Efficient Dynamics, the BMW Group has been successfully working on reducing fuel consumption and vehicle emissions through the development of highly efficient combustion engines, increasing electrification of drivetrains, intelligent lightweight construction, improved aerodynamics and coordinated energy management. The BMW i brand reflects Efficient Dynamics in its most systematic form. Flexible vehicle architecture, innovative electric and plug-in hybrid drivetrains and the use of new materials are the results of an integrated approach that is also reflected in a resource-efficient selection of materials and the intensive use of renewable energy in the production process. This contributes to a very favourable environmental footprint in BMW i vehicles over the entire product life cycle. 32 Combined Management Report General Information and Group Profile Organisation and Business Model Research and Development As part of the BMW i brand, the BMW iPerformance range forms a model family of its own with plug-in hybrid drivetrains. All BMW iPerformance models are equipped with a smart energy management system that ensures ideal interaction between the combustion engine and the electric motor. The option to drive all-electric, added efficiency gained through electric assistance features and the spontaneous response characteristics provided by the additional electric drivetrain lead to a new harmony of driving pleasure and sustainability. The flexibility of the technologies used makes it possible to rapidly expand the broad range of iPerformance models to include further series as required. With its MINI Electric, MINI is reinterpreting the urban tradition of the brand for the electric age and reinventing individual mobility for the city. The market launch of the first plug-in hybrid of the MINI brand (MINI Cooper S E Countryman ALL4: fuel consumption in l / 100 km (combined) 2.3 – 2.1 / / CO2 emissions in g / km (combined) 52 – 49 / / Electric power consumption in kWh / 100 km (combined) 14.0 – 13.2) in summer 2017 was followed by the presentation of the all-electric MINI Electric Concept at the IAA Cars in 2017. The series launch of all-electric MINI vehicles is scheduled to begin in 2019. The Vision 100 study presented for the Rolls-Royce brand in 2016 gave customers a first glimpse into the future of automobile luxury powered by electric drivetrains. 4. Services The fourth strategic direction relates to individual mobility services. The BMW Group aims to be the leading provider of premium mobility services going forward. To achieve this, it is essential to understand clearly the needs of its customers worldwide. This knowledge is the basis for providing customers with an attractive, comprehensive range of services. This includes easy-to-use, digitally supported mobility services that also feature bring-and-collect services or help customers find free parking spaces in urban environments. Further information can be found in the section “Sales and Marketing”. Against a backdrop of rapid technological change within the automotive industry, the BMW Group also enters into specific cooperation agreements with selected technology partners. The aim of collaboration with external partners, also across sectors, is to combine expertise in order to bring innovations to customers within the shortest time possible. A total of 14,047 people at 16 locations in five countries worked in the BMW Group’s global research and development network at 31 December 2017. Research and development expenditure rose significantly year-on-year to € 6,108 million (2016: € 5,164 million; + 18.3%). The research and development expenditure ratio stood at 6.2% (2016: 5.5%). The ratio of capitalised development costs to total research and development expenditure for the period (capitalisation rate) stood at 39.7% (2016: 40.5%). Amortisation of capitalised development costs totalled € 1,236 million (2016: € 1,222 million; + 1.1%). Further information on research and development expenditure is provided in the Report on Economic Position (Results of Operations) and in note 7 of the Group Financial Statements. In 2017, numerous awards and prizes once again underscored the BMW Group’s high level of innovation competence, above all in the areas of design, the use of innovative technologies and intelligent connectivity. Sustainability Long-term thinking and responsible action have long been the foundations of the BMW Group’s identity and its economic success. As early as 1973, the BMW Group appointed an environmental officer in what was then a pioneering development within the automobile sector. Today, the Sustainability Board, comprising all members of the Board of Management, sets the strategic direction along with binding targets. Since 2001, the BMW Group has been committed to the United Nations Environment Programme, the UN Global Compact and the Cleaner Production Declaration. For years, the BMW Group has ranked among the most sustainable companies in the automotive industry and is the only carmaker to have been listed consecutively in the renowned Dow Jones Sustainability Index since 1999. The BMW Group takes a holistic approach to sustainability management that encompasses the entire value chain. Apart from reduction of CO2 emissions, key components of the sustainability strategy include operational environmental protection, sustainability in the supply chain, employee orientation and social commitment. Since 1995, the BMW Group has cut the CO2 emissions of new cars sold in Europe (EU-28) by more than 42%. Average CO2 emissions in Europe (EU-28) in 2017 amounted to 122 g / km (2016: 124 g / km; – 1.6%). The systematic expansion of the Group’s vehicle fleet with alternative drivetrains as well as innovative mobility services have contributed significantly to the progress made. In 2017, for the first time more than 100,000 electrified vehicles were sold in one year. The BMW Group has set itself the goal of being a leader in the use of renewable energy in production and the value chain. In 2017, 81 % (2016: 63 %) of the BMW Group’s electricity worldwide came from renewable sources. In view of increasingly complex supplier relationships, it is important for the BMW Group to work together with suppliers to increase transparency and resource efficiency along the supply chain. The aim is to require suppliers to comply with environmental and social standards across the value chain. The BMW Group attaches great importance to training and development of its workforce. In 2017, investment in training and development programmes across the Group amounted to € 349 million (2016: € 352 million). In addition, 1,554 trainees were hired worldwide. A total of 4,750 young people are currently undergoing vocational training or participating in internal programmes to develop young talent. For several years now, the BMW Group has supported intercultural exchange. In partnership with the UN Alliance of Civilizations, the BMW Group presents the Intercultural Innovation Award for exemplary projects in this field. The principles and importance of sustainable business management are emphasised in the new Strategy NUMBER ONE > NEXT, which includes a clear commitment to preserving resources. The BMW Group remains fully committed to ecological and social sustainability along the entire value chain as well as to comprehensive product responsibility. Further information on sustainability and human resources can be found in the sections “Workforce” and “Sustainability” in the Group Management Report and in the Sustainable Value Report 2017 published on the Company’s website at. Economic conditions influence business performance and hence the results of operations, financial position and net assets of the BMW Group. Unforeseen disruptions in global economic relations can have highly unpredictable effects. Macroeconomic risks can lead to reduced purchasing power in the countries and regions affected and lead to reduced demand for the products and services offered by the BMW Group. Macroeconomic risks could – due to sales volume fluctuations – have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. Overall, the risk amounts attached to macroeconomic risks are classified as high. Macroeconomic risks are evaluated on the basis of historical data and by means of a cash-flow-at-risk approach, supplemented by scenario analyses. In view of the political events of recent years, global economic developments continue to be subject to a high degree of uncertainty, in particular with respect to potential barriers to global trade. For example, a reorientation of the USAʼs economic policy, the planned exit of the UK from the EU and possible election wins for anti-globalisation parties in EU countries could result in higher tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade in the coming years. A possible introduction of trade barriers, including anti-dumping customs duties, by the US administration could have an adverse impact on the BMW Groupʼs operations through less favourable conditions for importing vehicles. Moreover, countermeasures by the USAʼs trading partners could slow down global economic growth and have an adverse impact on the export of vehicles produced in the USA. The BMW Groupʼs “production follows the market” strategy involves local production both in the USA and with other important trade partners. Regional production reduces the existing risk of trade barriers. Nevertheless, any increase in trade barriers would have an adverse impact on the BMW Group. The planned Brexit could have a long-term adverse impact on the BMW Group, particularly as a result of increased trade barriers in the form of customs duties in relation to the European single market. Any such trade barriers could have a negative impact on volumes and costs both for vehicles and components produced in the EU for the UK as well as those produced in the UK for the European market. In extreme cases, this could lead to interruptions in production due to the processing of customs formalities. In addition, Brexit could lead to reduced customer spending in the wake of weaker economic performance, particularly in the UK. In the short and medium term, uncertainty regarding the outcome of the negotiations with the EU could exacerbate these factors and cause further negative currency effects. A possible further economic downturn within the EU could also potentially reduce growth prospects for the BMW Group. European integration with a unified economic and currency area is an important pillar of economic stability in Europe. The ongoing transition in China from an investment-driven to a consumer-driven economy is associated with slower growth rates and potentially greater instability on financial markets. If the Chinese economy were to grow at a significantly slower pace than expected, the consequence would be not only a decline in automobile sales, but also, potentially, lower demand for raw materials, which would have a negative impact above all on emerging economies such as Brazil, Russia or South Africa. Any further drop in raw material prices could result for the BMW Group in lower demand from these countries. Turmoil on the Chinese property, stock and banking markets and an overly rapid increase in interest rates by the US Federal Reserve could pose considerable risks for global financial market stability. Furthermore, increasing political unrest, military conflicts, terrorist activities, natural disasters or pandemics could have a lasting negative impact on the global economy and international capital markets. 100 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities The BMW Group addresses macroeconomic risks primarily by internationalising its sales and production structures, in order to minimise the extent to which earnings depend on risks in individual countries and regions. Flexible sales and production processes within the BMW Group increase the ability to react quickly to regional economic developments. Should the global economy develop significantly better than presented in the outlook, macroeconomic opportunities could arise for the BMW Groupʼs revenues and earnings. Significantly stronger GDP growth in China, consumer-oriented reforms within the eurozone, a cancellation of Brexit plans and intensified trade relations between the EU and the UK, growth stimulus through the tax reform in the USA or more robust consumer spending in emerging markets due to rising raw material prices could result in significantly stronger sales volume growth, reduced competitive pressures and corresponding improvement in pricing. Macroeconomic opportunities that could generate a sustainable impact on earnings are currently classified by the BMW Group as insignificant. Strategic and sector risks and opportunities Changes in legislation and regulatory requirements The sudden introduction of more stringent legislation and regulations, particularly with regard to emissions, safety and consumer protection and regional vehiclerelated purchase and usage taxes, represents a significant risk for the automobile industry. Country- and sector-specific trade barriers can also change at short notice. A sudden tightening of regulations in any of these areas can necessitate significantly higher investments and ongoing expenses or influence customer behaviour. Risks from changes in legislation and regulatory requirements could have a medium impact on earnings over the two-year assessment period. The risk amount attached to these risks is classified as high. In particular, risks arising from the tightening of emission laws have resulted in the assessment of the risk level being raised. At present, the BMW Group sees increasingly restrictive vehicle emissions regulations, particularly for conventional drivetrain systems, not only in the developed markets of Europe and North America, but also in growth markets such as China. The introduction of new measurement procedures to represent standard driving cycles, combined with significantly lower emissions thresholds, represents a major challenge for the automotive sector. The BMW Group is addressing this risk with its Efficient Dynamics concept and is playing a pioneering role in reducing both fuel consumption and emissions within the premium segment. The product range has been increasingly expanded with electric drivetrain systems in BMWi vehicles since 2013 and plug-in-hybrid technologies in a growing number of series models since 2015. These technologies have contributed to fulfilment of legal requirements with regard to CO2 emissions. Further risks can result from the tightening of existing import and export regulations. These lead primarily to additional expenses, but can also restrict imports and exports of vehicles or parts. 101 An established regulatory framework for innovative mobility solutions as well as government incentives are important prerequisites for introducing product innovations, such as autonomous driving, and for scaling up the range of electric mobility offerings. For BMWi and iPerformance vehicles with alternative drivetrain systems a faster expansion of charging infrastructure could increase acceptance and help boost sales of planned or recently introduced product innovations compared to forecast. This includes implementation of the 360° ELECTRIC portfolio in the field of electric mobility and collaboration with Toyota on hydrogen fuel cell technology. The BMW Groupʼs earnings could also be positively affected in the short to medium term by changes in trading policies. A possible reduction in tariff barriers, import restrictions or direct excise duties could lower the cost of materials for the BMW Group, and enable products and services to be offered to customers at lower prices. Further opportunities for the earnings performance of the BMW Group from changes in legislation and regulatory requirements compared to the outlook are classified as insignificant. Market development In addition to the economic factors and sector-specific political conditions, increasingly fierce competition among established manufacturers and the emergence of new competitors could also have effects which are difficult to predict. Unforeseen consumer preferences and changes in brand perceptions can give rise to opportunities and risks. If market risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk amount is classified as high. Intense competition, particularly in Western Europe, the USA, China, Japan and Korea is a potential cause for lower demand and for fluctuations in the regional distribution and composition of demand for BMW, MINI and Rolls-Royce brand vehicles and for mobility services. Greater competition could put pressure on selling prices and margins. Changes in customer behaviour can also be brought about by changes in attitudes, values, environmental factors and fuel or energy prices. For example, the ongoing political and public discussion on diesel engines could adversely affect demand for diesel vehicles. At the same time, however, this could lead to increased demand for vehicles with petrol engines or alternative drivetrains. In order to determine price and margin risks, a scenario approach is used. The BMW Groupʼs flexible sales and production processes enable risks to be reduced and newly arising opportunities in market and product segments to be taken. Local restrictions affecting product usage in specific sectors may limit BMW Group sales in individual markets. In some urban areas, for instance, local measures have been, or are being, introduced, including entry restrictions, congestion charges or, in some situations, highly restrictive registration rules. These may affect local demand for the BMW Group vehicles affected and hence have a negative impact on sales, margins and, possibly, the residual value of these vehicles. The BMW Group addresses this risk by offering locally emissions-free vehicles, such as the BMWi3, which benefit from state subsidies and exemptions. New opportunities are continuously being sought to create even greater added value for customers than currently expected, and thereby to realise significant opportunities with respect to sales growth and pricing. Further development of the product and mobility portfolio and expansion in growth regions offer the most important medium- to long-term growth opportunities for the BMW Group. Continued growth depends above all on the ability to develop innovative products and bring them to market. The range of services on offer was further expanded in 2017, particularly in the area of electric mobility. ChargeNow customers have access to more than 130,000 charging points in 29 countries. A new digital business field was created under the name BMW Energy Services. The BMW Group expects these opportunities to have no significant earnings impact over the two-year assessment period compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. 102 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities Risks and opportunities relating to operations Risks and opportunities relating to production and technologies Risks relating to production processes and technology fields are particularly apparent in potential sources of interruptions in production or additional costs to comply with quality standards under changed market conditions. If risks arising from production processes and technologies were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The corresponding risk amounts are classified as medium. By dealing with risk issues at the planning stage and taking appropriate measures, the risk has been reduced. Production stoppages and downtimes due to fire, machine and tooling breakdowns, IT disruptions, damage to infrastructure, power failures, transportation and logistical disruptions represent risks which the BMW Group addresses through appropriate precautions. Production structures and processes are designed from the outset with measures to minimise potential damage and the probability of occurrence. Measures taken include technical fire protection, land development with regard to flooding risks when facilities are expanded or new buildings added, interchangeability of production facilities, preventative maintenance, management of spare parts across sites, and predictive planning of transportation alternatives. Risk is also reduced through flexible working hour models and working time accounts as well as the ability to build individual split models or engine types at other sites within the production network. As a result, backlogs arising from production interruptions can be quickly recovered. Risks arising from interruptions and production downtime due to fire are also appropriately covered with insurance companies of good credit standing. In order to meet high standards in product quality and achieve favourable external ratings (e. g. for product safety), reduce statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations and keep down follow-up costs arising from other changes in planning assumptions, it may be necessary to incur a higher level of expenditure than originally forecast. In addition, availability of products may be limited, particularly at the start of production of new vehicles. These risks are mitigated through regular audits and the continual improvement of quality management, which ensures the high standard of quality. The BMW Group also recognises appropriate accounting provisions for statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations. These reduce the risk to earnings, as they are already taken into account in the outlook. Further information on risks related to provisions for statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations is provided in note 31 of the Group Financial Statements. The BMW Group sees opportunities in production processes and technology fields primarily through the competitive edge gained from mastering new and complex technologies. Opportunities could arise as a result of further technological innovations related to products or processes, as well as from organisational changes which improve efficiency or increase competitiveness. For example, the BMW Group has been using since 2017 a fully automated quality control system in the paint shop newly opened in 2017 at the BMW Group plant in Munich. The data obtained provides valuable feedback on the precision of upstream painting processes. These can be continuously optimised, potential sources of error promptly identified and rework avoided. Given the long lead times in developing new products and processes, additional opportunities within the reporting period are considered insignificant for the results of operations of the BMW Group. Risks and opportunities relating to purchasing Purchasing risks relate primarily to supply risks caused by the failure of a supplier as well as risks associated with the quality of bought-in parts. Production problems incurred by suppliers could lead to increased expenditure for the BMW Group through to interruptions in production and a corresponding reduction in sales. The increasing complexity of the supplier network, especially at the level of lower tier suppliers, whose operations can only be indirectly influenced by the BMW Group, is a further potential cause of downtimes at supplier locations. The increased threat of IT attacks on the supplier network in particular has resulted in a more critical assessment of the risk situation. If purchasing risks materialised, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year period. The risk amount attached to purchasing risks is classified as high. see note 31 103 Close cooperation between carmakers and suppliers in the development and production of vehicles and the provision of services generates economic benefits, but also increased dependency. Potential reasons for the failure of individual suppliers include in particular increased IT-related risk, non-compliance with sustainability or quality standards, insufficient financial strength of a supplier, the occurrence of natural hazards, fires and insufficient supply of raw materials. As part of supplier pre-selection, the BMW Group checks for compliance with the sustainability standards for the supplier network. This includes compliance with internationally recognised human rights and applicable labour and social standards. The principal means for ensuring compliance with the Sustainability Standard is a three-stage risk management system for sustainability. In addition, the technical and financial capabilities of suppliers are monitored, especially where modular-based production is concerned. Supplier sites are assessed for exposure to natural hazards, such as floods or earthquakes, in order to identify supply risks at an early stage and implement appropriate precautions. Fire risks at series suppliers are evaluated by means of questionnaires and selective site inspections. In order to minimise supply risks, the BMW Group draws up measures to reduce the use of raw materials or to substitute alternative raw materials. The BMW Group pays particular attention to the quality of parts built into its vehicles. In order to attain a very high level of quality, it may become necessary to invest in new technological concepts or discontinue planned innovations, with the result that the cost of materials could exceed levels accounted for in the outlook. By monitoring and developing global supplier markets, the BMW Group continuously strives to optimise its competitiveness by working together with the worldʼs best product and service providers. Within the Purchasing and Supplier Network, opportunities arise above all in the area of global sourcing through increased efficiency and the use of innovations developed by suppliers, which can lead to a broader range of products. Making full use of location-specific cost factors, in particular through local supplier structures in close proximity to new and existing BMW Group production plants and the introduction of new, innovative production technologies, could lead to lower cost of materials for the BMW Group. The new supply centre opened in Landshut in 2017 represents a further step in ensuring efficient and flexible logistics processes. Integration of previously unidentified innovations from the supplier market in the Groupʼs product range could provide a further source of opportunities. The BMW Group offers innovative suppliers numerous possibilities for creating specific contractual arrangements which are attractive for those developing innovative solutions. At regular intervals, the BMW Group honours its most inventive suppliers with the Supplier Innovation Award. The BMW Group expects these opportunities to have no significant earnings impact over the assessment period as compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Risks and opportunities relating to sales and marketing In order to sell its products and services, the BMW Group employs a global sales network, comprising primarily independent dealerships, branches, subsidiaries and importers. Any threat to the continued activities of parts of the sales network would entail risks for the BMW Group. The occurrence of sales and marketing risks is associated with a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk amount is classified as low. New developments in the field of digital communication and connectivity in particular offer new opportunities for the BMW Groupʼs brands. BMW CarData has made it possible since 2017 to provide customised service offers to BMW drivers based on data from the vehicle. If customers wish to use a specific service and actively consent to the release of their telematics data, requesting companies receive the data they need for the service in encrypted form via BMWʼs secure backend database. This information provides the basis for customised, data-driven and innovative service solutions. Additional opportunities could arise if new sales channels contribute to greater brand reach to customer groups than currently envisaged in the outlook. Digital communication and connectivity enables consumers to be reached on a more targeted and individualised basis, thus strengthening longterm relationships and brand loyalty. This can lead to a more intense product and brand experience for customers, which could lead to higher sales volume and have a positive impact on revenues and earnings. The BMW Group invests in advanced marketing concepts in order to intensify customer relationships. The BMW Group estimates the earnings impact as insignificant over the two-year assessment period as compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. 104 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities Information, data protection and IT Increasing digitalisation across all areas of business places considerable demands on the confidentiality, integrity and availability of electronically processed data and the associated use of information technology (IT). In addition to the increased threat of cybercrime, regulations covering the handling of personal data are becoming more stringent, for example as a result of the EU General Data Protection Regulation. If risks relating to information security, data protection and IT were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. Despite extensive security measures, the risks in this area are classified as high. In addition to cyber attacks and direct physical intervention, lack of awareness or misconduct on the part of employees may also represent a danger to the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information, data and systems. Direct consequences include expenditure required for rapid information, data and systems recovery. Negative impacts on operational performance due to the non-availability of products and services or disruptions in the production of components or vehicles are also possible. A further indirect result could be reputational damage. Great importance is attached to the protection of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of business information as well as employee and customer data, for instance against unauthorised access or misuse. Data security is an integral component of business processes and is aligned with the International Standard ISO / IEC 27001. As part of risk management, information security, data protection and IT risks are systematically documented, allocated appropriate measures by the departments concerned and continuously monitored with regard to threat level and risk mitigation. Regular analyses and controls as well as rigorous security management ensure an appropriate level of security. Despite continuous testing and preventative security measures, it is impossible to eliminate risks completely in this area. All employees are required to treat with care information such as confidential business, customer and employee data, to use information systems securely and handle risks with transparency. Group-wide requirements are documented in a comprehensive set of principles, guidelines and instructions, such as, for example, the Privacy Corporate Rules for handling personal data. Regular communication and awareness-raising measures create a high level of security and risk awareness among those involved. Employees receive training to ensure compliance with the legal requirements and internal rules. With regard to cooperations and business partnerships, the BMW Group protects its intellectual property as well as customer and employee data through clear instructions on information security and data protection and the use of information technology. Information pertaining to key areas of expertise as well as sensitive personal data are subject to particularly stringent security measures. Technical data protection incorporates industry-wide standards and good practices. Responsibility for information security and data protection lies for each Group entity with the Board of Management or relevant management team. With the advance of digitalisation, the BMW Group is improving the customer experience and its existing lines of business. At the same time, new digital business segments are emerging, which are mainly focused on information technology. The development and provision of digital services for customers, increased vehicle connectivity and autonomous driving solutions are opening up new opportunities. Through BMW ConnectedDrive and BMW CarData the range of services and apps on offer to customers is constantly being expanded and updated. The BMW Group expects these opportunities to have no significant earnings impact over the assessment period compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. 105 Financial risks and risks relating to the use of financial instruments Currency risks and opportunities As an internationally operating enterprise, the BMW Group conducts business in a variety of currencies, thus giving rise to currency risks and opportunities. A substantial portion of Group revenues, purchasing and funding occur outside the eurozone (particularly in China and the USA). Cash-flow-at-risk models and scenario analyses are used to measure currency risks and opportunities. If currency risks were to materialise, they could be associated with a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level attached to currency risks is medium. Significant opportunities can arise if currency developments are favourable for the BMW Group. Operational currency management is based on the results of currency risk analyses. The BMW Group manages currency risks at both strategic (medium and long term) and operational level (short and medium term). Medium- and long-term measures include increasing production volumes and purchase volumes in foreign currency regions (natural hedging). Currency risks are managed in the short to medium term and for operational purposes by means of hedging on financial markets. The principal objective of this currency management process is to increase planning reliability for the BMW Group. Hedging transactions are entered into only with financial partners of good credit standing. Opportunities are also secured through the use of options during specific market phases. Risks and opportunities relating to raw materials As a large-scale manufacturing company, the BMW Group is exposed to purchase price risks, particularly in relation to raw materials used in vehicle production. The analysis of raw material price risk is based on planned purchases of raw materials and components containing those raw materials. If risks relating to raw material prices were to materialise, they would likely have a low earnings impact over the twoyear assessment period. A low risk level is attached to these risks. Significant opportunities could arise if raw material prices developed favourably for the BMW Group. Changes in commodity prices are monitored on the basis of a well-defined management process. The principal objective is to increase planning reliability for the BMW Group. Price fluctuations for precious metals (platinum, palladium, rhodium), non-ferrous metals (aluminium, copper, lead, nickel) and, to some extent, for steel and steel ingredients (iron ore, coking coal) and energy (gas, electricity) are hedged using financial derivatives or supply contracts with fixed pricing arrangements. Liquidity risks The major part of the Financial Services segmentʼs credit financing and leasing business is refinanced on capital markets. Liquidity risks may arise in the form of rising refinancing costs or from restricted access to funds as a consequence of the general market situation or the failure of individual banks. If liquidity risks were to materialise, they would be likely to have a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk amount associated with liquidity risk, including the risk of the BMW Groupʼs credit rating being downgraded, which would lead to an increase in financing costs, is classified as low. Based on the experience of the financial crisis, a minimum liquidity concept has been developed and is rigorously adhered to. Use of the “matched funding principle” to finance the Financial Services segmentʼs operations eliminates liquidity risks to a large extent. Solvency is assured at all times throughout the BMW Group by maintaining a liquidity reserve and by the broad diversification of refinancing sources. Regular measurement and monitoring ensure that cash inflows and outflows for the various maturities and currencies offset each other. This approach is incorporated in the BMW Groupʼs target liquidity concept. The liquidity position is monitored continuously and managed through Group-wide planning of financial requirements and funding. A diversified refinancing strategy reduces dependency on any specific type of instrument. Moreover, the BMW Groupʼs solid financial and earnings position results in high credit ratings from internationally recognised rating agencies. A description of the methods applied for risk measurement and hedging in conjunction with currency and commodity risks is provided in note 37 of the Group Financial Statements. If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group as hedges are generally accounted for as hedging relationships. Further information on risks in conjunction with financial instruments is provided in note 37 of the Group Financial Statements. see note 37 see note 37 106 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities Risks and opportunities relating to pension obligations Pension obligations are influenced in particular by fluctuations of market yields on corporate bonds, as well as by other economic and demographic parameters. Opportunities and risks arise depending on changes in these parameters. If risks relating to pension obligations materialised, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk amounts relating to pension obligations are classified as medium. Within a favourable capital market environment, the return generated by growth-oriented pension assets may exceed expectations and reduce the deficit of the relevant pension plans. This could have a significantly favourable impact on the net asset position of the BMW Group. Future pension payments are discounted on the basis of market yields on high-quality corporate bonds. These yields are subject to market fluctuation and therefore influence the level of pension obligations. Changes in other parameters, such as rises in inflation and longer life expectancy, also impact pension obligations and payments. The BMW Groupʼs pension obligations are mainly held in external pension funds or trust arrangements with the related assets legally separated from those of the Group. The amount of funds required to finance pension payments out of operations in the future is substantially reduced by the fact that the Groupʼs pension obligations are mainly settled out of pension fund assets. The pension assets of the BMW Group comprise interestbearing securities, equities, real estate and other investment classes. Assets held by pension funds and trust arrangements are monitored continuously and managed on a risk-and-return basis. Diversification of investments also helps to mitigate risk. In order to reduce fluctuations in pension funding shortfalls, investments are structured to match the timing of pension payments and the expected development of pension obligations. Remeasurements on the liability and fund asset sides are recognised net of deferred taxes in other comprehensive income and hence directly in equity (within revenue reserves). Further information on risks in conjunction with pension provisions is provided in note 30 of the Group Financial Statements. Risks and opportunities relating to the Financial Services segment The categories of risk relating to financial services comprise credit and counterparty risk, residual value risk, interest rate risk, operational risks and liquidity risk. Evaluation of liquidity risk for the Financial Services segment is included in the liquidity risk category for the Group as a whole. The segmentʼs total risk exposure was covered at all times during the 2017 financial year by the available risk-covering assets. As a result, the Financial Services segmentʼs risk-bearing capacity was assured at all times. Credit and counterparty risks and opportunities relating to the Financial Services segment Credit and counterparty default risk arises within the Financial Services segment if a contractual partner (e. g. a customer or dealer) either becomes unable or only partially able to fulfil its contractual obligations, so that lower income is generated or losses incurred. If credit and counterparty risks were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk amount is classified as medium. The BMW Group classifies potential opportunities in this area as significant. As part of its credit and counterparty risk management, the Financial Services segment uses rating systems in order to assess the creditworthiness of its contractual partners. Credit risks are managed at the time of the initial credit decision on the basis of a calculation of the present value of standard risk costs and subsequently, during the term of the credit, by risk provisioning to cover risks resulting from changes in customer creditworthiness. Individual customers are hereby classified by category each month on the basis of their current contractual status, and appropriate levels of allowance recognised in accordance with that classification. If macroeconomic developments are more favourable than assumed in the outlook, credit losses may be reduced, leading to a positive earnings impact. see note 30 107 Residual value risks and opportunities relating to the Financial Services segment Risks and opportunities arise in conjunction with leasing contracts if the market value of a leased vehicle at the end of the contractual term of a lease differs from the residual value estimated at the inception of the lease and factored into the lease payments. A residual value risk exists if the expected market value of the vehicle at the end of the contractual term is lower than its estimated residual value at the date the contract is entered into. If residual value risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact from the Groupʼs perspective over the twoyear assessment period. A high and medium earnings impact would then arise for the affected Financial Services and Automotive segments, respectively. The risk amount is classified as medium for the Group as a whole. Opportunities can arise out of a positive deviation between the actual market value and the original residual value forecast. The BMW Group classifies potential residual value opportunities as significant. Each vehicleʼs estimated residual value is calculated on the basis of historical external and internal data. This estimation provides the expected market value of the vehicle at the end of the contractual period. As part of the management of residual value risks, the net present value of risk costs is calculated at contract inception. Market developments are observed throughout the contractual period and the risk assessment updated. Interest rate risks and opportunities relating to the Financial Services segment Interest rate risks in the Financial Services segment relate to potential losses caused by changes in market interest rates. These can arise when fixed interest rate periods do not match for assets and liabilities recognised in the balance sheet. If risks relating to interest rate risks were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk amount is classified as low. The BMW Group classifies potential interest rate opportunities compared to the outlook as significant. Interest rate risks in the Financial Services business are managed by matching maturities for refinancing and by employing interest-rate derivatives. If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group are accounted for as hedging instruments. Further information on risks in conjunction with financial instruments is provided in note 37 of the Group Financial Statements. Operational risks in the Financial Services segment Operational risks are defined in the Financial Services segment as the risk of losses arising as a consequence of unsuitability or failure of internal procedures (process risks), people (personnel-related risks), systems (infrastructure and IT risks) and external events (external risks). The recording and measurement of risk scenarios, loss events and countermeasures in the operational risk management system provide the basis for a systematic analysis and management of potential or materialised operational risks. Annual self-assessments are also carried out. If operational risks were to materialise, they would be likely to have a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk amount is classified as low. see note 37 108 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities Legal risks Compliance with the law is a basic prerequisite for the success of the BMW Group. Applicable law provides the binding framework for the BMW Groupʼs worldwide activities. As a result of its global operations, the BMW Group is exposed to various legal risks. If legal risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk amount attached to significant identified legal risks is classified as medium. However, it cannot be ruled out that new legal risks, as yet unforeseen, could materialise that could have a high earnings impact for the BMW Group. The increasing globalisation of the BMW Groupʼs operations and of business interdependencies in general, combined with the variety and complexity of legal provisions, including increasingly import and export regulations, give rise to an increased risk of non-compliance with applicable law. A Compliance Management System is in place at BMW Group to ensure that the representative bodies, managers and staff consistently act in a lawful manner. Further information on the BMW Groupʼs Compliance Management System can be found in the section Corporate Governance. Like all entities with international operations, the BMW Group is confronted with legal disputes, claims relating to warranties and product liability or rights infringements and proceedings initiated by government agencies. Any of these could, amongst others, have an adverse impact on the Groupʼs reputation. Such proceedings are essentially typical for the sector or a consequence of realigning product or purchasing strategies to changed market conditions. Particularly in the US market, class action lawsuits and product liability risks can have substantial financial consequences and cause damage to the Groupʼs public image. More rigorous application or interpretation of existing regulations could result in a greater number of recalls. The high quality of the Groupʼs products, which is ensured by regular quality audits and ongoing improvement measures, helps reduce this risk. Possible risks for the BMW Group related to competition and antitrust law cannot be predicted or quantified at present. Further information on current developments with regard to antitrust risks and contingent liabilities can be found in note 36 of the Group Financial Statements. The BMW Group recognises appropriate levels of provision for lawsuits. In addition, a part of these risks is insured where this makes business sense. Some risks, however, either cannot be estimated or only to a limited extent, or may lead to costs only in an unlikely event. Such items are reported as contingent liabilities. It cannot be ruled out, however, that damages could arise that are either not covered or not fully covered by insurance policies or provisions or reported as contingent liabilities. In accordance with IAS 37 (Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets), the required information is not provided if the BMW Group concludes that disclosure of the information could seriously prejudice the outcome of the relevant legal proceedings. Further information on contingent liabilities is provided in note 36 of the Group Financial Statements. see note 36 see note 36 109 Overall assessment of the risk and opportunities situation The overall risk assessment is based on a consolidated view of all significant individual risks and opportunities. Exposure to risks in the individual risk categories remains essentially stable. The combination of more stringent emissions requirements worldwide and the possibility that related laws and regulations may be brought forward results in a higher risk level in that area. In addition, the increased threat of IT attacks in the supplier network has led to an increased estimation of the risk in purchasing. By contrast, the risk level for production has been reduced by the implementation of measures. Overall, there has been no significant change in the overall risk or opportunities level compared to the previous year. In addition to the risk categories described above, unforeseen events could have a negative impact on business operations and hence on the BMW Groupʼs results of operations, financial position and net assets, and its reputation. A comprehensive risk management system is in place to ensure that the BMW Group successfully manages these risks. From todayʼs perspective, management does not see any threat to the BMW Groupʼs status as a going concern. As in the previous year, identified risks are considered to be manageable, but could – like the opportunities – have an impact on the BMW Groupʼs outlook if they were to materialise. The BMW Groupʼs financial position is stable and cash needs are currently covered by available liquidity and credit lines.