Fleet carbon emissions1
The BMW Group is continually reducing the carbon
emissions of its fleet of vehicles by equipping them with
highly efficient engines and electrified drivetrain systems. Thanks to the rigorous deployment of Efficient
Dynamics technologies, our vehicles also set standards
in terms of dynamism and driving pleasure.
In 2014, the volume of carbon emissions produced by
our vehicle fleet sold in Europe1
 decreased slightly to
130 grams CO2 / km (2013: 133 grams CO2 / km; –2.3%).
The scale of the decrease in fleet emissions in 2014
was therefore not as pronounced as originally forecast,
mainly reflecting the impact of a higher-value model
mix on the one hand and the later-than-planned availability of the new MINI on the other. In the Annual
Report 2013, we had forecast a “moderate decrease” for
the financial year 2014.Research and development play a vital role for the BMW
Group, given its broad range of products and the high
number of new models. Our vehicles and services also
set standards in terms of connecting car occupants
with the outside world. During 2014, a total of 11,779
employees were engaged throughout the BMW Group’s
global research and innovation network at twelve locations spread over five countries, to deliver the best
product quality possible and develop innovative technologies for customers.
Research and development expenditure for the year decreased by 4.7% to € 4,566 million (2013: € 4,793* million). The research and development ratio was 5.7%,
0.6 percentage points lower than in the previous year
(2013: 6.3%). The ratio of capitalised development costs
to total research and development costs for the period
(capitalisation ratio) was 32.8% (2013: 36.4%). Amortisation of capitalised development costs totalled € 1,068 million (2013: € 1,069 million). Further information on research and development expenditure is provided in the
section “Results of Operations, Financial Position and
Net Assets” and in note 11 to the Group Financial Statements.
Drive concepts: setting the course for the future
In line with our commitment to Efficient Dynamics, we
are working continuously to optimise both our range
of combustion engines featuring TwinPower turbo technology on the one hand and the various electric motors,
energy storage and energy management systems for
electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles developed for BMW
eDrive on the other. In the long term, the BMW Group
is also promoting the development of hydrogen-powered
fuel cell technology as a source of energy.
The new Efficient Dynamics family of engines, comprising 3-, 4- and 6-cylinder power units, reflects the
output of a rigorous and consistently applied development process. Higher aluminium content plus the use
of magnesium (which is even lighter) has enabled the
BMW Group to significantly reduce the average weight
of its latest range of engines. The first of this new generation of engines is a 1.5-litre, 3-cylinder petrol engine,
which has found its first home in the BMW i8. The BMW
Group also presented the first 4-cylinder versions of
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
the new engine family during the first half of 2014. Due
to commonalities in the design of our petrol and diesel
engines, the percentage of identical parts used can be as
high as 60%, while the structural similarities between
petrol and diesel engines are around 40%.
The BMW i8 combines the driving performance of a
sports car with the fuel consumption of a compact-class
model. The plug-in hybrid system developed for the
BMW i8 meets the very highest specifications in terms
of driving dynamics, efficiency, practical usefulness
and quality, thus underlining the BMW Group’s technological leadership in the field of drive system development. In the long term, the BMW Group also plans to
transfer eDrive technology to other core brand models.
The BMW 3 Series plug-in hybrid prototype unveiled in
2014 provides a preview of how extreme efficiency can
be combined with ultimate driving pleasure in the world’s
most successful premium-class sedan. The prototype
features a 4-cylinder petrol engine from the new Efficient
Dynamics family with TwinPower turbo technology
combined with an electric drive system. The outcome is
a car that delivers sporty driving dynamics similar to
being behind the wheel of a conventionally powered
6-cylinder BMW 3 Series model, but with far lower fuel
consumption. The possible integration of a plug-in
hybrid system is already a firm part of our thinking when
new BMW and MINI models are being developed, thus
ensuring, among other things, that future model variants
equipped with hybrid drive technology will be just as
suitable for everyday use as their standard counterparts.
The BMW Group took a further step forward in the field
of powertrain electrification with its presentation in
2014 of the newly developed range of hybrid drive systems intended for high-performance electric drives
based on Power eDrive technology. In future-generation
plug-in hybrid vehicles, around two-thirds of the drive
system’s output should come from the Power eDrive
electric system and around one-third from the TwinPower
turbo technology combustion engine. The BMW Group
is pressing ahead with the development of batterypowered drive systems (as in the BMW i3) and plug-in
hybrids, as well as in other areas such as fuel-cell electric
technology and high-voltage electrified systems (Power
eDrive). With its wide range of drive systems, the BMW
Group can and will continue to be able to react flexibly * Prior year figures have been adjusted in accordance with IAS 8, see note 9.
39 Combined Management Report
to the needs of customers and new regulations stipulated
by legislators.
Intelligently designed lightweight construction
Lightweight construction is an essential component of
the BMW Group’s Efficient Dynamics strategy and
firmly embedded in its basic understanding of modern
manufacturing. The consistent use of lightweight materials in vehicle design is particularly important with
electrically powered cars, as not only the battery capacity,
but also the total weight of the vehicle restrict their
range. In order to compensate for the added weight of
the electrical components, the BMW Group has developed its LifeDrive concept for BMW i series vehicles,
which is firmly committed to the use of lightweight design. In this context, the BMW Group has, for the first
time, achieved an innovative combination comprising
an aluminium chassis and a CFRP passenger compartment. Specifically deployed, the material used helps reduce total vehicle weight, optimises its point of gravity
and increases the stability of the car’s body. The BMW
Group is currently working on further possible applications, such as hybrid wheel rims comprising a mixture
of aluminium and CFRP. In the case of the BMW M3
and M4 models, the high rigidity and low weight of CFRP
allows the cardan shaft to be manufactured as a single
piece, without a centre bearing. In addition to achieving
a 40% weight-saving compared to the previous model,
a further benefit is that the rotating mass is reduced,
thus resulting in a further improvement in response behaviour. After more than ten years of intensive research
work and the continual optimisation of the processes,
materials, systems and tools involved, the BMW Group
is currently the only automotive manufacturer with
the required know-how to utilise CFRP on a large-scale
production basis.
Highly automated driving at the limit
Precise, reliable control of a vehicle when driven at its
dynamic limit is a key aspect of highly automated driving.
Only a system that can safely master all dynamic situations, including those encountered when a vehicle is
driven at its technical limit, will be able to instil trust and
provide sustained and secure relief for the driver in tiring
situations.
The BMW Group has built an innovative, highly automated research prototype, which in 2014 demonstrated
the utmost safety at the vehicle’s dynamic limit, thanks
to perfected control technology. On a closed-off racetrack, the BMW test vehicle additionally underlined the
efficiency of a new generation of control systems, which
can actively intervene in key driving decisions and
at the same time coordinate the electrically controlled
steering with the brake and accelerator. The system
therefore goes one decisive step further than any of its
predecessors. With BMW ActiveAssist, the BMW Group
is playing a pioneering role in implementing safety-related, highly automated systems. Back in October 2009,
in conjunction with the predecessor research project,
BMW Track Trainer, the BMW Group drove a highly automated vehicle through the racing line of the “Nordschleife” at the Nürburgring racetrack, one of the most
demanding circuits in the world. The BMW emergency
stop assistant research project has delivered further
valuable findings. If the driver fails to react, for example
due to a medical emergency such as a heart attack,
this feature can switch to the highly automated mode,
steer the vehicle safely to the roadside and automatically
send an emergency call. Back in 2011, the first BMW
test vehicle was already driven on a multi-lane motorway using the highly automated mode. Meanwhile, with
some 20,000 kilometres of testing behind them, the
development engineers have gathered valuable insights
into the behaviour and handling strategies of their highly
automated vehicles.
Research project “Virtual marketplace of the future”
Location Based Services enable users to receive information on places of interest, services and events in the
surrounding area – anytime and anywhere. Even while
driving, location-based services and other information
can be a useful supplement, either en route or at your
destination. For that reason, BMW ConnectedDrive already offers users a whole range of location-based information. In future, the vehicle will be able to present the
customer with information and items of interest along
the route, tailored to suit the situation and the user’s
individual preferences. The premiere of the latest generation of the optional navigation system “Professional”
in the BMW 2 Series Convertible achieved an even
higher level of convenience and reliability in terms of
route guidance. The system, which was first presented
in 2014, updates its navigation data on a regular basis,
several times per year, assuming a new version of map
data is available. The user is required to pay neither 
40
18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT
18 General Information on the BMW Group
23 Report on Economic Position
23 General and Sector-specific
Environment
26 Overall Assessment by Management
26 Financial and Non-financial
Performance Indicators
29 Review of Operations
 29 Automotive Segment
 35 Motorcycles Segment
 36 Financial Services Segment
 38 Research and Development
 40 Purchasing
 41 Sales and Marketing
 44 Workforce
 45 Sustainability
49 Results of Operations, Financial
Position and Net Assets
61 Comments on Financial Statements
of BMW AG
64 Events after the End of the
Reporting Period
65 Report on Outlook, Risks and
Opportunities
82 Internal Control System and Risk
Management System Relevant for the
Consolidated Financial Reporting Process
83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers
and Explanatory Comments
87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets
licensing fees nor transmission costs. Via the SIM card
built into the car, the new map data are sent to the
vehicle via the mobile network (LTE), without having
to take the longer route via an external data carrier and
manual installation.
Outstanding technology and design
In the most recent competition for the prestigious “International Engine of the Year Award”, the BMW Group
was awarded prizes in two different categories. For the
fourth time now, the 3.0-litre in-line 6-cylinder petrol
engine featuring BMW TwinPower turbo technology was
among the main prizewinners. The engine powers
numerous current BMW models. The 1.6-litre 4-cylinder
turbo engine, which is fitted in models such as the MINI
Cooper S Countryman and the MINI Cooper S Paceman,
was winner in its class for the eighth consecutive time.
The BMW Group won as many as eight prizes at last
year’s “Red Dot Award for Product Design”. The “Red
Dot” went to seven BMW models. Apart from the
BMW i3, which took the “Red Dot: Best of the Best”
award and thus the highest accolade for trendsetting
design, the BMW i8, the 2 Series Coupé, the 3 Series
Gran Turismo, the 4 Series Coupé and Convertible and
the BMW R nineT all received prizes. Furthermore,
the new MINI received an “Honourable Mention”. With
the “iF product design award”, the BMW i8 was presented with a prize by Industrie Forum Design e. V. for
its innovative design. The greatest appreciation, however, was accorded to the BMW i3, which won the “iF
product design award Gold”. Further awards went to
the X5, the 2 Series Coupé, the 4 Series Coupé, the 3 Series Gran Turismo and the BMW R nineT in the category “Product, transportation design / special vehicles”.
The primary focus of the BMW Group’s purchasing and
logistics activities is to achieve an optimal balance of
quality, innovation, flexible supply structures and competitive cost. In this context, we therefore go to great
lengths to design the supply chain with our business
partners, thus ensuring that we can react rapidly and
flexibly at all times to fluctuations in order volumes, even
within a volatile environment.
Numerous model start-ups
2014 saw the start-up of 13 new BMW and MINI brand
models. Most of the BMW start-ups were concentrated
on Europe and the NAFTA region. The production start
of the new X4 at the Spartanburg plant resulted in a
broader supplier base within the NAFTA region. Close
collaboration with external business partners and the
BMW Group’s own in-house component production
team resulted in the introduction of numerous innovations, many of them relating to the BMW i8.
Increasing importance of NAFTA region
During the year under report, the construction of a new
plant in San Luis Potosí (Mexico) with a planned annual
manufacturing capacity of 150,000 units was announced.
This move is in line with the strategy of ensuring globally balanced growth. For the BMW Group, it will also
entail a further increase in NAFTA-based purchases in
the coming years, whilst at the same time contributing
to currency hedging. In view of these developments,
the BMW Group’s decentralised organisational structures in the NAFTA region have been strengthened and
newly aligned.High level of investment safeguards productivity
and technology lead
The Purchasing and Supplier Network is also responsible
for component production throughout the BMW Group.
The importance of the Landshut plant as a competence
centre for lightweight construction was underlined by
the expansion of CFRP production facilities at the site.
The Landshut plant also serves as a centre for electromobility-related components, including, for instance,
production of the electric motors and engine transmission
units for the BMW i3 and i8. Important chassis and
drive components for the BMW i models are produced
at the Dingolfing plant.tart-up of Rolls-Royce Ghost Series II
The Rolls-Royce Ghost Series II has been in the showrooms since the autumn with a moderately revised
design and continues to combine smooth, understated
performance with contemporary luxury.
In 2014, Rolls-Royce Motor Cars added ten dealerships
to its sales network, an important step in its aspiration
to strengthen its position in the ultra-luxury segment.
New approach to communications with #BMWstories
BMW is breaking new ground in communications
with #BMWstories. The online platform www.bmw.
com / BMWstories offers a broad spectrum of communication channels. These include films and photo galleries depicting the special features of BMW models.
Since #BMWstories started in May 2014, the online
platform has received more than 3.5 million hits. Over
200 million interactions have already taken place in
social media. The published videos have been viewed
over 36 million times.
Successful launch of BMW i 360°ELECTRIC
With BMW i 360°ELECTRIC, BMW currently offers a
comprehensive package of products and services for
purely battery-powered and plug-in hybrid vehicles in
38 countries worldwide. The package is based on four
features: comfortable, rapid, emissions-free charging at
home; simple comprehensive access to public charging
stations; flexible mobility for long-distance journeys
and an Assistance Service for maintenance and repairs.
BMW offers two types of product for charging at home:
in addition to the Wallbox Pure for simple, safe charging,
the Wallbox Pro has been available since 2014 for more
rapid availability.
Development of connected mobility
The BMW Group further extended its connected mobility services in 2014. In total, BMW ConnectedDrive services were introduced in a further eleven markets, as a
result of which they are now available in 36 countries worldwide. In the meantime, 95% of all new vehicles in
the BMW fleet are equipped with an integrated SIM
card.
In addition to its intelligent emergency call feature,
which already offers a broader range of functions than
the E-call required by EU legislation as from 2016, the
customer can benefit from a large number of innovative services. These include the Concierge Call, which
is available around the clock and – if required – looks
up addresses and feeds them directly into the navigation system or makes reservations directly. In addition, the real-time traffic information (RTTI) or the remote functions, for example, offer useful support for
the driver.
In addition, further distribution channels have been
established for mobility services. During the year under
report, the ConnectedDrive Store opened not only in
the pilot markets of Belgium and Luxembourg, but also
in Germany. For the first time in the premium segment,
services can therefore be ordered quickly and easily via
a PC or even directly from the vehicle, and used straight
away. The ConnectedDrive Store therefore grants access not only to new vehicles but also to used vehicles
equipped with ConnectedDrive.
BMW i sales model
To coincide with the market launch of the BMW i3 in
Europe and Japan, a direct sales model was successfully
introduced in these markets. Over 200 selected BMW i
partners offer BMW i brand vehicles. In addition, the
BMW i models are available in selected direct sales markets via new distribution channels – including via the
Customer Interaction Centre (CIC), which has been successfully introduced in nine markets. In four markets
to start with, the Mobile Sales Advisor (MSA) has also
become a fixed component of the BMW i sales model.
The integrated BMW i online sales platform enables customers to order their BMW i3 via the Internet, too. The
new sales channels provide customer-friendly access to
the BMW i range of products and services. In the showrooms, the Product Genius in operation at all BMW i
partners also contributes to comprehensive product
advice.
Premium services for individual mobility
Beyond its innovative electric and hybrid cars, BMW i
also stands for sustainable mobility concepts. The aim
of the mobility services is to promote urban mobility,
irrespective of the means of transport used.
43 Combined Management Report
DriveNow, the car-sharing service offered by BMW i,
MINI and Sixt, enables users to rent BMW and MINI
vehicles according to their needs. Via an app, the website or directly on the road, it is a simple matter for users
to find, book and park the cars again in another part
of the city. The DriveNow service is currently available
in Munich, Berlin, Düsseldorf, Hamburg, Cologne, San
Francisco, Vienna and, since December 2014, in London,
too. The fleet currently consists of about 2,800 cars. At
the end of 2014, over 390,000 customers had benefited
from the premium car-sharing service. Under the brand
name AlphaCity, we also offer a car-sharing scheme
for businesses. Up to November 2014, 10,000 registered
employees had used the AlphaCity service.
ParkNow is an app- and Web-based service, which helps
resolve parking problems for users. On the one hand,
parking spaces are available to customers in partner car
parks which can be booked online. On the other hand,
the service makes it easier to find roadside parking spots.
ChargeNow is the BMW i mobility service that simplifies finding and using public charging stations run by
various suppliers belonging to an international network. In 2014, a large proportion of BMW i customers
opted for this service. ChargeNow currently has over
24,000 charging points at its disposal in 19 markets.
BMW i Ventures was founded back in 2011 to ensure
optimum conditions for the use and promotion of innovative mobility services. Based in New York, BMW i
Ventures facilitates access to new technologies and opens
up new customer groups, thereby reinforcing the strategic approach adopted by BMW i. Life360, MyCityWay,
JustPark, ChargePoint and ChargeMaster are examples
of some of BMW i Ventures’ strategic investments.
Customer services remain on track in 2014
In 2014, sales of BMW and MINI spare parts, accessories
and services were well up on the previous year’s level,
with the major markets in the USA, Germany and China
making a decisive contribution to this performance.
Growth was also registered in many other markets, such
as Russia, Korea and South Africa. The dynamic growth
in business goes hand in hand with investments in the
future logistics network and with many other measures
aimed at boosting customer satisfaction.
New premium experience in showrooms
By 2017, the Future Retail programme will be implemented worldwide with a view to enhancing the premium experience of our brands and products.Sustainable management
Sustainability for the BMW Group means making a
lasting positive contribution to economic success, thus
creating added value for the business. Manufacturing
with efficient and resource-friendly production processes and offering customers state-of-the-art solutions
for sustainable individual mobility gives the BMW
Group a competitive advantage. Our employees play a
vital role in this context with their personal commitment and ideas, a fact borne out, for example, by the
€ 31 million saved in 2014 alone in conjunction with
the ideas management system in place throughout the
BMW Group. Our commitment to sustainable management and our aspiration for social responsibility along
the entire value chain are firmly embedded within the
BMW Group.
As well as requiring social and ecological aspects to be
taken into account in internal decision-making processes, the BMW Group’s sustainability management
system involves the systematic analysis of external factors and a continual dialogue with our stakeholders.
Materiality process
Global megatrends such as urbanisation or climate
change have an impact on both regulatory conditions
and customer requirements, causing new fields of
business to arise. In order to recognise any such
changes in good time, we regularly perform a review
using our materiality process. In this context, we analyse the importance of challenges on society, both from
the point of view of different stakeholder groups and
from an internal BMW Group perspective. The results
of the materiality analysis – shown in the materiality
matrix – form the basis for our regular verification of
the direction our sustainability strategy is taking.
Sustainability ratings
In 2014 the BMW Group was able to maintain its position as most sustainable premium manufacturer in the
automotive industry and again secured excellent placings in widely regarded ratings. In the Dow Jones Sustainability Indices (DJSI), for instance, the BMW Group
took first place in the Automobiles sector. The BMW
Group is therefore the only enterprise in this sector to
have been listed in the index without interruption since
its inception. In the Global 500 rating of the Carbon
Disclosure Project (CDP), we again achieved 100 out of
a possible 100 points for transparent reporting and the
best mark for climate protection measures, thus retaining
our leading position again in 2014. Based on this result,
the BMW Group is listed with the highest performance
score “A” in the global Climate Performance Leadership Clean production
The BMW Group improves resource efficiency by integrating environmental management in all of its production processes. Since 2006 we have reduced both the
volume of resources utilised and the emissions per vehicle produced by an average of 45.0%.*The BMW Group again reduced the energy consumption per vehicle produced by 4.7% to 2.25 MWh during
the period under report. One of the measures that contributed towards the efficiency improvement was the
utilisation of intelligent energy data management. It is a
component of the BMW Group’s “Industrie 4.0” production concept and based on intelligent electricity meters that continually measure the energy consumption
levels of production facilities and robots and compare
them with a centralised corporate network for the purpose of detecting and avoiding, at the earliest possible
stage, any deviations that lead to excessive electricity
consumption.
The utilisation of highly efficient, ecologically sustainable combined heat and power plants (CHPs) and the
use of electricity generated from renewable sources at
our production sites, as well as improved energy efficiency measures, enabled us to reduce CO2 emissions
per vehicle produced by a further 2.9% year-on-year to
0.66 tonnes during the period under report.
At 2.18 m³ per vehicle produced, water consumption
was maintained at a stable low level. At 0.47 m³ the same
applies to the volume of process wastewater generated
per vehicle produced.
The volume of non-recyclable production waste was
further reduced to 4.93 kg per vehicle produced in 2014,
an improvement of 14.0%. A number of measures contributed towards this development, one of which was
an additional improvement in the treatment of washing water used in the production of passenger car brake
discs at the Berlin plant.
Solvent emissions were sharply curtailed by 18.9%
to 1.29 kg per vehicle produced during 2014, which is
mainly due to the fact that in the Chinese plant in
Dadong*
 the retrofitting of the paint shop with an exhaust air cleaning system was reflected in full-year
statistics for the first time.
*
 Joint venture BMW Brilliance Automotive Ltd., Shenyang.
Sustainability along the entire value chain
Sustainability criteria also play a major role in the selection and assessment of our suppliers as well as in the
field of transport logistics. The active management of
sustainability risks along the supplier chain reduces compliance and image risks. With this in mind, the BMW
Group has integrated a comprehensive system of sustainability management in its purchasing processes.
The amount of energy needed for transportation worldwide has risen considerably in recent years. In order to
keep CO2 emissions to an absolute minimum, we adhere
to the principle “production follows the market”. Moreover, we are continually increasing the percentage of
low-carbon modes of transport we use. In total, 63.3%
of all new vehicles left our plants by rail during the twelvemonth period under report (2013: 60.7%).
Fleet CO2 emissions again reduced
For many years now, the use of our Efficient Dynamics
technologies in series production has enabled us to
continually reduce the CO2 emissions generated by our
vehicles. Again in 2014, further progress was made in
the electrification of our fleet with the introduction of
the BMW i8 plug-in hybrid sports car and the launching
of the BMW i3 in additional key markets. These measures form the basis for complying with legally stipulated
CO2 and fuel consumption limits going into the future.The current high level of volatility prevailing in many
economies continues to have an unsettling impact on
markets and consumers. Many emerging economies are
currently performing below their full potential. The
eurozone is still having to cope with a range of structural
problems, such as those evident in Greece.
The slowing of economic growth in China, one of the
BMW Group’s principal markets, also continues to pose
a major risk. Upheavals in the property or banking sector
in this region could result in reduced demand for our
products and services.
Any escalation of political conflicts (such as in Russia),
terrorist activities, natural disasters or possible pandemics could have a negative impact on the world economy and international capital markets. The BMW Group
counters these risks primarily by internationalising its
sales and production structures, in order to reduce the
potential impact of risk exposures in individual countries. Political and global economic risks are determined
by analysing historical data and applying a cash-flow-atrisk approach.
If risks from this category were to materialise, they
could – due to sales volume fluctuations – have a high
impact on results of operations over the two-year assessment period. Overall, the risk amounts attached
to political and global economic risks are classified as
high.
Political and global economic opportunities
Despite the high level of risk involved, the BMW Group
sees an opportunity for above-average growth in the
Chinese market. In addition to the impact from economic developments, the BMW Group’s earnings can
also be positively affected in the short to medium term
by changes in the legal environment. A possible reduction in tariff barriers, import restrictions or direct excise duties could lower the cost of materials for the
BMW Group, also enabling products and services to be
offered to customers at lower prices. Another factor to
consider is that regulatory support for forward-looking
technologies, such as electromobility, help to make
the total cost of ownership more attractive for customers
in the form of incentives. Developments of this kind
open up opportunities to achieve faster market penetration for these technologies, which could, in turn, lead
to higher sales volumes and, all other things being equal,
result in an improved quality of earnings. Changes in
the legal environment are monitored continuously at a
centralised level. At present, however, the BMW Group
does not see any significant political and / or global economic opportunities, which could have a positive sustainable impact on its earnings performance.
Strategic and sector risks and opportunities
New regulations and the development of fuel and energy
prices also influence various aspects of our business,
including customer behaviour. Medium- and long-term
targets have already been put in place in Europe, North
America, Japan, China and other countries to minimise
fuel consumption and CO2 emissions.
Strategic and sector risks
One of the main risks for the automobile industry is
the possible threat of short-term tightening of laws and
regulations, including local registration restrictions. In
some cases, changes in customer behaviour are not only
brought on by new regulations, but also through changes
of opinion, values and environmental issues. Among
other factors, global climate change is having an effect
on legislation, regulations and consumer behaviour. In
order to meet structural changes in the demand for
individual mobility that no longer necessarily entail
actually owning a vehicle, the BMW Group is offering
corresponding mobility services, such as the DriveNow
car-sharing model.
With its Efficient Dynamics concept, the BMW Group
is playing a pioneering role in the premium segment in
reducing both fuel consumption and emissions. With
effect from 2013, our range of products was expanded
to include electric powertrains in BMW i series vehicles.
These innovations also make an important contribution
in our endeavours to fulfil statutory rules and requirements in terms of CO2 emissions. The BMW Group is
investing in the development of sustainable drive technologies and materials, with the aim of providing highly
efficient vehicles for individual mobility in the premium
segment, both now and in the future.
Employees make a vital contribution to sustainable
growth and improved profitability through their innovative skills. One prerequisite for this is a consistent
strategic approach to the management of human resources, even in the event of changes in the legal framework. The BMW Group has appropriate measures in 
74
18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT
18 General Information on the BMW Group
18 Business Model
20 Management System
23 Report on Economic Position
23 General and Sector-specific
Environment
26 Overall Assessment by Management
26 Financial and Non-financial
Performance Indicators
29 Review of Operations
49 Results of Operations, Financial
Position and Net Assets
61 Comments on Financial Statements
of BMW AG
64 Events after the End of the
Reporting Period
65 Report on Outlook, Risks and
Opportunities
65 Outlook
70 Report on Risks and Opportunities
82 Internal Control System and Risk
Management System Relevant for the
Consolidated Financial Reporting Process
83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers
and Explanatory Comments
87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets
place for such eventualities. Risk amounts and earnings
impact are measured on the basis of extensive scenario
analyses.
If risks from the strategic and sector category were to
materialise, they could have a medium impact on results
of operations over the two-year assessment period. The
amounts of risk attached to strategic and sector-specific
risks are classified as medium.
Strategic and sector opportunities
Additions to the product and mobility portfolio and
expansion in growth regions are seen as the most important opportunities for growth in the medium to
long term for the BMW Group.
Remaining on growth course depends above all else on
the ability to develop innovative products and bring
them to market. The launching of the BMW i brand opens
up new customer target groups for the BMW Group and
consolidates the position of BMW as a sustainable and
forward-looking brand. BMW i products can be seen as
“empowerment projects” for new technologies and processes, which will also benefit other vehicle concepts.
The existing product portfolio has been expanded by the
addition of mobility services such as DriveNow, ChargeNow and ParkNow. The general acceptance of, and
sales volumes generated with, planned future product
innovations could be better than predicted in the outlook. In the short term, however, any potential positive
impact is classified as not material.
The long-term trend towards greater sustainability provides opportunities to boost sales of sustainable products and, under the right circumstances, achieve better
selling prices. Innovations – such as the BMW i3 and i8
in the field of electromobility or Efficient Dynamics
across the entire BMW Group product portfolio – provide excellent platforms for future growth. Potential
is also seen by engaging in new product and market
categories and by developing new customer target
groups. New business models and cooperation arrangements with the BMW Group’s growing network of
business partners often provide the best means to take
advantage of these opportunities. Good examples of
this are the implementation of the 360°ELECTRIC portfolio in the field of electromobility, the partnership with
SIXT in the field of mobility services and collaboration
with Toyota on a hydrogen fuel cell system.
The BMW Group is constantly refining the tools it uses
to recruit employees, encourage career development and
bind employees to the enterprise. Within this environment, employees find the optimal situation in which to
develop their skills. If these measures generate greater
benefits than currently expected, the BMW Group’s revenues, results of operations and cash flows could be
positively impacted and forecasted figures surpassed.
Creating a successful performance culture and the development of the expertise and skill sets of both staff and
managers alike throughout the organisation could also
have a positive impact on revenue and profitability.
Given the long lead times involved, the BMW Group’s
earnings performance is unlikely to benefit over the assessment period from efficiency improvements or from
the implementation of product and process developments
to a significantly greater extent than that already incorporated in the outlook.
Risks and opportunities relating to operations
Production and technology-related risks
Production stoppages and downtimes – in particular
due to fire, but also those attributable to manufacturing
equipment breakdowns, logistical disruptions or new
vehicle production line start-ups – represent risks which
the BMW Group counters with a broad range of appropriate measures. Production structures and processes
are designed from the outset with a view to reducing
potential damage and the probability of occurrence. In
addition to technical fire protection measures, the BMW
Group has implemented an array of strategies, including
preventative maintenance, land development measures
including contingencies against flooding, spare parts
management on a multi-site basis and backup plans
for alternative transportation. The level of risk is also
reduced by the deployment of flexible work-schedule
models and employee time accounts, but also by the
ability to build specific models at additional sites if
necessary. Moreover, risks arising from business interruption and loss of production as a consequence of fire
are also insured up to economically reasonable levels
with insurance companies of good credit standing.
If risks from the production and technology-related risks
category were to materialise, they could have a high impact on the results of operations over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to prouction
and technology-related issues is classified as medium.
75 Combined Management Report
Production and technology-related opportunities
In addition to the risks involved, we firmly believe that
the choice of sites for new production facilities also
creates a wealth of opportunities. Selecting a new location goes hand in glove with the opportunity to shape
the local environment in a positive way (e. g. job creation, training, corporate social responsibility (CSR) projects). Our aim is to continue our commitment to sustainability whenever a new site is selected. We therefore
endeavour to incorporate flagship projects at our production sites that have a clear focus on sustainability
(e. g. wind turbines in Leipzig). The option of offsetting
capacities between BMW Group sites is always kept in
mind if production technologies can be employed to
achieve greater efficiency in the use of resources.
Compared to the outlook, efficiency improvements are
unlikely to have a significantly greater impact over
the two-year assessment period than that already incorporated in the outlook.
Purchasing risks
Close cooperation between carmakers and automotive
suppliers creates economic benefits on the one hand,
but also raises levels of dependency on the other. The
increasing trend towards modular-based production
with a set of common architectures covering various
models and product lines exacerbates the consequences
of the loss of a supplier or failure to supply on time.
As part of the supplier preselection process, the BMW
Group is careful to ensure that its future business partners meet the same high ecological, social and corporate governance standards by which the BMW Group is
generally measured. Suppliers are assessed on the basis
of the BMW Group Sustainability Standard, which is
applied throughout our supplier network worldwide.
This set of fundamental principles and standards covers
both production and non-production aspects relevant
for the goods and services provided by suppliers, which
also includes compliance with internationally recognised
human rights and applicable labour and social standards. The principal tool for ensuring compliance with
the BMW Group Sustainability Standard is a threestage sustainability and risk management approach comprising a BMW Group-specific sustainability risk filter,
a sustainability questionnaire and a sustainability audit.
In addition, the technical and financial capabilities of
suppliers – especially those supplying for modular-based
production – are continuously monitored during both
the development and production phases of the Group’s
vehicles. Particular attention is paid to the quality of the
parts. In order to attain the level of quality required, it
may become necessary to invest in new technological
concepts or discontinue planned innovations, with the
consequence that the cost of materials could exceed
levels incorporated in the outlook. Supplier sites are assessed for exposure to natural hazards, such as floods
or earthquakes, in order to identify supply risks at an
early stage and implement appropriate countermeasures.
Production problems incurred by suppliers could have
adverse consequences for the BMW Group, ranging
from increased expenditure through to production interruptions and a corresponding reduction in sales
volume.
Raw materials management procedures are in place to
mitigate the risk of a production interruption due to
shortages of supplies of critical raw materials. In order
to reduce supply risks, the BMW Group works hard
to reduce the input of raw materials or to use alternative
raw materials as a substitute.
If purchasing risks were to materialise, they could have
a high impact on the BMW Group’s results of operations over the two-year assessment period. The level
of risk attached to supply risks is classified as high,
mainly due to the insufficient availability of raw materials
in Asia.
Risks relating to sales and marketing
Changes in global economic conditions and increasingly
protectionist trends are among the factors that could
result in lower demand as well as fluctuations in the regional spread and composition of sales in terms of vehicles and mobility services. Risks relating to these
developments can be reduced with the aid of flexible
selling and production processes. At the same time, increased pressure on selling prices and margins caused
by intense competition on the world’s markets, particularly in Western Europe, the USA and China, requires
constant analysis, including keeping an eye on developments in grey market volumes from the USA to China.
Selling price and margin risks are determined on the
basis of past experience and changing global economic
conditions, with risk exposures measured using a cashflow-at-risk model.
If sales and marketing risks were to materialise, they
could have a high impact on the BMW Group’s results
of operations over the two-year assessment period. The
level of risk attached to sales and marketing risks is
classified as high.
76
18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT
18 General Information on the BMW Group
18 Business Model
20 Management System
23 Report on Economic Position
23 General and Sector-specific
Environment
26 Overall Assessment by Management
26 Financial and Non-financial
Performance Indicators
29 Review of Operations
49 Results of Operations, Financial
Position and Net Assets
61 Comments on Financial Statements
of BMW AG
64 Events after the End of the
Reporting Period
65 Report on Outlook, Risks and
Opportunities
65 Outlook
70 Report on Risks and Opportunities
82 Internal Control System and Risk
Management System Relevant for the
Consolidated Financial Reporting Process
83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers
and Explanatory Comments
87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets
Opportunities relating to sales and marketing
Opportunities may arise due to other technical innovations relating to products and processes and as a result
of organisational changes. In the field of lightweight
construction, for example, carbon was being put to use
in high volumes for the first time in the automobile industry in the construction of the BMW i3.
Since carbon could also be used in other vehicle projects,
we see further competitive advantages in terms of fuel
consumption and driving dynamics, which could, in
turn, have a positive impact on sales volume growth. The
opportunities will not have a material impact over the
assessment period on the results of operations of the
BMW Group.
The BMW Group focuses its selling capacities primarily
on markets with the greatest sales volume and revenue
potential and fastest growth rates. Investment in existing
and new marketing concepts is firmly aimed at intensifying relationships with customers. A good example is
the new marketing concept for BMW i products and
services, which will be offered in selected markets in the
future via an innovative multi-channel model. There
will be no relaxing of efforts in the active search for new
opportunities to create even greater added value for
customers than currently expected, whilst at the same
time looking for ways to boost sales volumes and achieve
better selling prices. Developments in the field of digital communication and networking are also opening
up opportunities for marketing the BMW Group’s
various brands. Consumers can meanwhile be reached
on a more targeted and individual basis, thus helping to
strengthen long-term relationships and brand loyalty.
The BMW Group keeps track of the latest developments
and trends in communication technology, including
the use of social media and networks, in order to extend
customer reach for its brands. Automotive-related business activities of technology companies are also closely
followed (autonomous driving). The BMW Group’s
brands are present on numerous platforms, such as
Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. Thanks to its intensive
efforts in this area, the BMW Group is registering faster
growth rates on the various platforms than its competitors, measured in terms of the number of fans and
visits. The decisive advantage of digital communication
is that the brands are able to engage in a direct dialogue with customers and thus create a more intense
product and brand experience.
The BMW Group considers that these opportunities will
not have a material impact on the results of operations
over the two-year assessment period compared to the
assumptions made in the outlook.
Risks relating to pension obligations
The BMW Group’s pension obligations to its employees
resulting from defined benefit plans are measured on
the basis of actuarial reports. Future pension payments
are discounted by reference to market yields on highquality corporate bonds. These yields are subject to market fluctuation and therefore influence the level of pension obligations. Changes in other parameters, such as
rises in inflation and longer life expectancy, also impact
pension obligations and payments. Opportunities and
risks arise depending on the nature and scale of changes
in these parameters.
Most of the BMW Group’s pension obligations are administered in external pension funds or trust arrangements and the related assets are kept separate from Company assets. The amount of funds required to finance
pension payments out of operations in the future is
therefore substantially reduced, since most of the Group’s
pension obligations are settled out of pension fund assets. The pension assets of the BMW Group comprise
interest-bearing securities, equities, real estate and other
investment classes. Pension fund assets are monitored
continuously and managed on a risk-and-yield basis.
A broad spread of investments also helps to reduce risk.
In order to reduce fluctuations in pension funding
shortfalls, investments are structured to coincide with
the timing of pension payments and the expected pattern of pension obligations. Remeasurements on the
obligations and fund asset sides are recognised, net of
deferred taxes, in “Other comprehensive income” and
hence directly in equity (within revenue reserves).
If risks relating to pension obligations were to materialise, they could have a high impact on the BMW
Group’s results of operations over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to risks relating
to pension obligations is classified as high.
Opportunities relating to pension obligations
Within a favourable capital market environment, the
return generated by pension assets may exceed expectations and reduce the deficit of the relevant pension
plans. This, in turn, could have a materially favourable 
77 Combined Management Report
impact on the net assets position and earnings performance of the BMW Group.
Further information on risks in conjunction with pension provisions is provided in note 36 to the Group
Financial Statements.
Information, data protection and IT risks
The importance of electronically processed data continues to rise, with information technology (IT) playing
an increasingly crucial role in every aspect of the
business. These developments create opportunities on
the one hand, whilst also posing a source of risk on the
other.
The BMW Group could incur damage if the confidentiality, integrity and / or availability of sensitive information and data are not maintained. Great importance is
attached to the protection of business information and
of employee and customer data against unauthorised
access and / or misuse. Data security, based on International Security Standard ISO / IEC 27001, is an integral
component of all business processes. Personal data is
protected in accordance with the stringent requirements
of the EU Data Protection Directive and the Federal
Data Protection Act (Bundesdatenschutzgesetz – BDSG).
All employees are required to treat confidential information (such as customer and employee data) in an appropriate manner, ensure that information systems are
properly used and that risks are handled with the utmost transparency. Uniform requirements, documented
in a coordinated and comprehensive set of principles,
guidelines and work instructions, are applicable groupwide. Regular communication and sensitisation-raising activities create a high degree of security and risk
awareness among the employees involved. Employees
receive training to ensure compliance with applicable
requirements and in-house rules.
Risk management procedures include systematic documentation of all information / data protection and IT
risks, regular monitoring and the implementation of
appropriate measures by the departments responsible.
Technical data protection procedures include virus scanners, firewall systems, access controls at both operating
system and application level, regular data backups and
data encryption. Regular analyses and controls (including the testing of data protection requirements) and
rigorous security management ensure a high level of
security.
Responsibility for data protection in each Group entity
lies with the Board of Management (of BMWAG) or
the relevant company management team. Local Data
Privacy Protection Officers are embedded in each of the
Group’s entities. In the case of cooperation arrangements and business partner relationships, the BMW
Group protects its intellectual property as well as customer and employee data by stipulating clear instructions with regard to data protection and the use of
information technology. Information pertaining to key
areas of expertise as well as sensitive personal data
are subject to particularly stringent security measures.
In a clear signal to employees, customers and Europe’s
data protection authorities that data protection is taken
very seriously, the Board of Management of BMWAG
resolved a set of Binding Corporate Rules (BCR) that
ensure the secure transfer of personal data throughout
the BMW Group’s global organisation. The BMW Group
has become the first car manufacturer worldwide to
successfully complete the relevant BCR recognition procedures.
The requirements placed on IT facilities – both externally
and internally – are changing at a breathtaking pace in
the face of technological developments. Potential risks
are therefore investigated continuously and appropriate
measures put in place to prevent or minimise their impact. Despite regular testing and the whole gamut of
preventative security measures employed, it is nevertheless impossible to rule out risks completely in this area.
If information, data protection and IT risks were to materialise, they are only likely to result in a minor impact
on the results of operations over the two-year assessment period. The levels of risk attached to information,
data protection and IT risks are classified as medium.
Information, data protection and IT opportunities
Conversely, the deployment of information technology
also opens up many opportunities. New approaches
to production and energy supply systems that are currently being investigated in the context of “Industrie
4.0” are generating significant efficiency improvements
and resulting in greater sustainability. The range of 
78
18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT
18 General Information on the BMW Group
18 Business Model
20 Management System
23 Report on Economic Position
23 General and Sector-specific
Environment
26 Overall Assessment by Management
26 Financial and Non-financial
Performance Indicators
29 Review of Operations
49 Results of Operations, Financial
Position and Net Assets
61 Comments on Financial Statements
of BMW AG
64 Events after the End of the
Reporting Period
65 Report on Outlook, Risks and
Opportunities
65 Outlook
70 Report on Risks and Opportunities
82 Internal Control System and Risk
Management System Relevant for the
Consolidated Financial Reporting Process
83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers
and Explanatory Comments
87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets
services and apps on offer to customers through BMW
ConnectedDrive is constantly being expanded and updated.
The opportunities arising from the deployment of information technology are not expected to have a material
positive impact during the two-year assessment period
compared to the assumptions made in the outlook.
Financial risks and opportunities
Currency risks and opportunities
As an internationally operating enterprise, the BMW
Group conducts business in a variety of currencies, thus
giving rise to currency risks and opportunities. Since a
substantial portion of Group revenues is generated outside the eurozone (particularly in China and the USA)
and the procurement of production material and funding
is also organised on a worldwide basis, fluctuations in
exchange rates can play a significant role for Group
earnings. Cash-flow-at-risk models and scenario analyses
are used to measure currency risks and opportunities.
Operational currency management is based on the results
provided by these tools. In 2014 the Chinese renminbi,
the US dollar, the British pound, the Russian rouble and
the Japanese yen constituted approximately 75% of the
total foreign currency exposure of the BMW Group, with
the Chinese renminbi and the US dollar accounting for
the lion’s share of foreign currency transactions. The
BMW Group manages currency risks at both strategic
(medium and long term) and operating level (short
and medium term). Medium- and long-term measures
include increasing production volumes in non-euroregion countries (natural hedging) and increasing purchase volumes denominated in foreign currencies.
Constructing new plants in countries such as the USA,
China or Brazil have also helped reduce foreign currency exposures. Currency risks are managed in the
short to medium term and for operational purposes by
means of hedging. Hedging transactions are entered
into only with financial partners of good credit standing.
Opportunities are also secured through the deployment
of options. A description of the methods applied for
risk measurement and hedging is provided in note 43
to the Group Financial Statements. Counterparty risk
management procedures are carried out continuously
in order to monitor the creditworthiness of business
partners.
If currency risks were to materialise, they could have a
high impact on the BMW Group’s results of operations
over the two-year assessment period. A high level of
risk is attached to currency risks. Significant opportunities can arise if currency developments are favourable
for the BMW Group.
If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group are accounted for as
hedging relationships. Further information on risks in
conjunction with financial instruments is provided in
note 43 to the Group Financial Statements.
Risks and opportunities relating to raw materials
Changes in prices of raw materials are monitored on the
basis of a set of well-defined management procedures.
The principal objective of these management processes
is to increase planning reliability for the BMW Group.
Price risks and opportunities relating to precious metals
(platinum, palladium, rhodium) and non-ferrous metals
(aluminium, copper, lead), and, to some extent, to steel
and steel ingredients (iron ore, coking coal) and energy
(gas, electricity) are hedged using financial derivatives
and / or supply contracts with fixed pricing arrangements.
A description of the methods applied for risk measurement and hedging is provided in note 43 to the Group
Financial Statements.
If risks relating to raw materials were to materialise,
they could have a medium impact on the BMW Group’s
results of operations over the two-year assessment
period. A high level of risk is attached to risks relating
to raw materials.
Conversely, significant opportunities can arise if prices
of raw materials develop favourably for the BMW Group.
If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group are accounted for as
hedging relationships. Further information on risks in
conjunction with financial instruments is provided in
note 43 to the Group Financial Statements.
Liquidity risks
Based on experience gained during the financial crisis,
a minimum liquidity concept has been developed and
is rigorously adhered to. Solvency is assured at all times
throughout the BMW Group by maintaining a liquidity
reserve and by the broad diversification of refinancing
sources. The liquidity position is monitored continuously at a separate entity level and managed by means 
79 Combined Management Report
of cash flow requirements and sourcing forecast system in place throughout the Group. Liquidity risks may
be reflected in rising refinancing costs. They may also
manifest themselves in restricted access to funds as a
consequence of the general market situation or the default of individual banks. The major part of the Financial Services segment’s credit financing and lease business is refinanced on capital markets. Thanks to its
excellent creditworthiness, the BMW Group has good
access to financial markets and, as in previous years,
was able to raise funds at good conditions in 2014, reflecting a diversified refinancing strategy and the solid
liquidity and earnings base of the BMW Group. Internationally recognised rating agencies have additionally
confirmed the BMW Group’s solid creditworthiness.
If liquidity risks were to materialise, they are only likely
to result in a low impact on the BMW Group’s results
of operations over the two-year assessment period.
The risk of incurring liquidity risk is classified as low –
including the risk of the BMW Group’s rating being
downgraded and any ensuing deterioration in financing
conditions.
If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group are accounted for as
hedging relationships. Further information on risks in
conjunction with financial instruments is provided in
note 43 to the Group Financial Statements.
Risks and opportunities relating to Financial Services
The categories of risk relating to the provision of financial services are credit and counterparty risk, residual
value risk, interest rate risk, liquidity risk and operational risk. In order to evaluate and manage these risks,
a variety of internal methods has been developed
based on regulatory environment requirements (such
as Basel III) and which comply with both national and
international standards. A set of strategic principles
and rules derived from regulatory requirements serves
as the basis for risk management within the Financial
Services segment. At the heart of the risk management
process is a clear division between front- and back-office activities and a comprehensive internal control system. The key risk management tool employed within
the Financial Services segment is aimed at ensuring
that the Group’s risk-bearing capacity is not exceeded.
In this context, all risks (defined as “unexpected losses”)
must be covered at all times by an appropriate asset
cushion in the form of equity capital. Unexpected losses
are measured using a variety of value-at-risk techniques,
adapted to each relevant risk category. Risks are aggregated after taking account of correlation effects. The
total amount of risks calculated in this way is then compared with the resources available to cover risks (asset
cushion). The segment’s risk-bearing capacity is monitored continuously with the aid of an integrated limit
system which also differentiates between the various risk
categories. The segment’s total risk exposure was
covered at all times during the past year by the available
risk-coverage volumes.
Credit and counterparty risks and opportunities
Credit and counterparty default risk arises within the
Financial Services segment if a contractual partner (i. e.
a customer or dealer) either becomes unable or is only
partially able to fulfil its contractual obligations, such
that lower income is generated or losses incurred. The
Financial Services segment uses a variety of rating
systems in order to assess the creditworthiness of its
contractual partners. Credit risks are managed at the
time of the initial credit decision on the basis of a calculation of the present value of standard risk costs and
subsequently, during the term of the credit, by using a
range of risk provisioning techniques to cover risks
emanating from changes in customer creditworthiness.
In this context, individual customers are classified by
category each month on the basis of their current contractual status, and appropriate levels of allowance
recognised in accordance with that classification. If
economies develop more favourably than assumed in
the outlook, there is a chance that credit losses may be
reduced and earnings improved accordingly.
If credit and counterparty risks were to materialise, they
could have a medium impact on the BMW Group’s
results of operations over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to credit and counterparty risks is classified as high. The BMW Group classifies potential opportunities in this area as material.
Residual value risks and opportunities
Risks and opportunities arise at the end of the contractual term of a lease if the market value of the leased vehicle differs from the residual value calculated at the inception of the lease and factored into the lease payments.
80
18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT
18 General Information on the BMW Group
18 Business Model
20 Management System
23 Report on Economic Position
23 General and Sector-specific
Environment
26 Overall Assessment by Management
26 Financial and Non-financial
Performance Indicators
29 Review of Operations
49 Results of Operations, Financial
Position and Net Assets
61 Comments on Financial Statements
of BMW AG
64 Events after the End of the
Reporting Period
65 Report on Outlook, Risks and
Opportunities
65 Outlook
70 Report on Risks and Opportunities
82 Internal Control System and Risk
Management System Relevant for the
Consolidated Financial Reporting Process
83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers
and Explanatory Comments
87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets
A residual value risk exists if the expected market value
of the vehicle at the end of the contractual term is lower
than its residual value at the date the contract is entered
into. Each vehicle’s market value is forecast on the basis
of historical external and internal data and used to predict the expected market value of the vehicle at the end
of the contractual period. As part of the process of
managing residual value risks, a calculation is performed
at the inception of each contract to determine the present value of risk costs. Market developments are observed throughout the contractual period and the risk
assessment updated appropriately.
If residual value risks were to materialise, they could have
a high impact on Group earnings over the two-year
assessment period. The impact on the segments affected
would be on a medium scale. The level of risk is classified as high for the Group as a whole. The BMW Group
classifies potential residual value opportunities as
material.
Interest rate risks and opportunities
Interest rate risks in the Financial Services segment relate
to potential losses caused by changes in market interest
rates and can arise when fixed interest rate periods for
assets and liabilities recognised in the balance sheet do
not match. Interest rate risks in the Financial Services
line of business are managed by raising refinancing funds
with matching maturities and by employing interest rate
derivatives.
If interest rate risks were to materialise, they are only
likely to result in a low impact on the BMW Group’s
results of operations over the two-year assessment
period. The level of risk attached to interest rate risks
is classified as medium.
The BMW Group classifies potential interest rate opportunities as material.
Liquidity and operational risks
Use of the “matched funding principle” to finance the
Financial Services segment’s operations eliminates
liquidity risks to a large extent. Regular measurement
and monitoring ensure that cash inflows and outflows
from transactions in varying maturity cycles and currencies offset each other. The relevant procedures are incorporated in the BMW Group’s target liquidity concept.
Operational risks are defined in the Financial Services
segment as the risk of losses arising as a consequence of
the inappropriateness or failure of internal procedures
(process risks), people (personnel-related risks), systems
(infrastructure and IT risks) and external events (external risks). These four categories of risk also include related legal and reputation risks. The comprehensive recording and measurement of risk scenarios, loss events
and countermeasures in the Operational Risk Management Suite (OpRisk-Suite) provides the basis for a systematic analysis and management of potential and / or actual
operational risks. Annual self-assessments are also carried out.
If operational risks were to materialise, they are only
likely to result in a low impact on the BMW Group’s
results of operations over the two-year assessment
period. The level of risk attached to operational risks
is classified as medium.
Legal risks
Compliance with the law is a basic prerequisite for the
success of the BMW Group. Current law provides the
binding framework for the BMW Group’s various business activities around the world. The growing international scale of operations of the BMW Group, the complexity of the business world and the whole gamut of
complex legal regulations increase the risk of laws not
being adhered to, simply because they are not known or
fully understood.
The BMW Group has established a Compliance Organisation aimed at ensuring that its representative bodies,
managers and staff act in a lawful manner at all times.
Further information on the BMW Group’s Compliance
Organisation can be found in the section “Corporate
Governance”.
Like all internationally operating enterprises, the BMW
Group is confronted with legal disputes relating, in particular, to warranty claims, product liability, infringements of protected rights, and proceedings initiated
by government agencies. Any of these matters could,
among other outcomes, have an adverse impact on the
Group’s reputation. Such proceedings are typical for
the sector and can arise as a consequence of realigning
product or purchasing strategies to suit changed market
conditions. Particularly in the US market, class action
lawsuits and product liability risks can have substantial
financial consequences and cause damage to the Group’s
public image. The BMW Group recognises appropriate
levels of provision for lawsuits. A part of these risks, 
81 Combined Management Report
particularly regarding the US market, is insured where
this makes business sense. Some risks, however, cannot
be assessed in full or completely defy assessment. It
cannot be ruled out that losses from damages could
arise which are either not covered or not fully covered
by insurance policies or provisions.
The high quality of the Group’s products, which is ensured by regular quality audits and ongoing improvement
measures, helps to reduce this risk. In comparison with
competitors, this can give rise to benefits and opportunities for the BMW Group.
If legal risks were to materialise, they are only likely to
have a low impact on the BMW Group’s results of operations over the two-year assessment period. The level of
risk attached to legal risks is classified as low. This assessment also includes consideration of risks arising from
ongoing court and arbitration proceedings. However, it
cannot be ruled out that new legal risks, as yet unidentified, could materialise which could have a high impact
on the BMW Group’s results of operations and financial
condition.
Overall assessment of the risk and
opportunities situation
The overall risk assessment is based on a consolidated
view of all significant individual risks and opportunities.
In view of the growing level of strategic and sector-specific risks, the overall risk situation for the BMW Group
has increased marginally compared to the previous year.
In addition to the risk categories described above, it is
possible that unforeseeable events could have an adverse impact on the BMW Group’s results of operations,
financial position and net assets as well as its reputation.
We have created a comprehensive risk management
system that ensures we can master risks. In addition,
the opportunities described above could potentially
help the BMW Group to achieve its targets and forecasts.
From today’s perspective, management does not see any
threat to the BMW Group’s going-concern status. As
in the previous year, identified risks are considered to
be manageable, but could – just like opportunities –
have an impact on the BMW Group’s forecasts if they were
to materialise. The BMW Group’s liquidity is stable and
all cash requirements are currently covered by available
funds and accessible credit lines.