Automotive segment Deliveries to customers: solid increase In 2016, the Automotive segment sold a record number of vehicles for the sixth year in succession. Dynamic market conditions, particularly in Europe, influenced automobile sales volumes more strongly than expected. Consumer spending in the UK in 2016 remained stable, despite the Brexit decision. The upward trend from the previous year in southern European countries also continued unbroken. Despite growing political and economic uncertainties in the international environment, deliveries to customers increased by a solid 5.3% to a total of 2,367,603 1 BMW, MINI and Rolls Royce brand vehicles (2015: 2,247,485 1 units). BMW, the Group’s core brand, reported a solid 5.2% increase to 2,003,359 1 units (2015: 1,905,234 1 units), taking it over the two-million-unit threshold for the first time in a single year. MINI also recorded solid growth, with deliveries to customers up by 6.4% to 360,233 units (2015: 338,466 units). Rolls-Royce Motor Cars sold 4,011 units (2015: 3,785 units; + 6.0%). In the Annual Report 2015, the outlook for the full year 2016 had foreseen a slight increase in sales volume. The generally positive sentiment among consumers, especially in Europe, but also in Asia, helped the BMW Group to exceed its original forecast. Fleet carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions 2 : slight decrease The fleet-wide deployment of Efficient Dynamics technologies – including drivetrain electrification – contributes to the efficient reduction of carbon dioxide emissions. CO2 emissions produced by the vehicle fleet sold in Europe (EU-28) decreased slightly to 124 grams CO2 / km (2015: 127 grams CO2 / km; – 2.4%) in the year under report. As foreseen in the outlook for the full year 2016, fleet carbon emissions fell slightly and were therefore in line with forecast. 1 Including the joint venture BMW Brilliance Automotive Ltd., Shenyang (2016: 316,200 units, 2015: 282,000 units). 2 EU-28. 39 Revenues: slight increase Automotive segment revenues edged up by 1.0 % to a new record figure of € 86,424 million (2015: € 85,536 million), with currency exchange effects holding down the scale of the increase. The forecast of a slight rise in Automotive segment revenues made in the Annual Report 2015 therefore was confirmed. EBIT margin in target range of between 8 and 10% The EBIT margin in the Automotive segment (profit before financial result divided by revenues) came in at 8.9% (2015: 9.2%; – 0.3 percentage points). As foreseen for the financial year 2016, the EBIT margin from automobile business was within the target range of between 8 and 10% and therefore in line with expectations. Return on capital employed (RoCE): slight increase The return on capital employed (RoCE) amounted to 74.3% (2015: 72.2%; +2.1 percentage points). Amongst other factors, transactions with other segments and the expansion of business with service and Connected Drive contracts made positive contributions to RoCE for the Automotive segment. The outlook for RoCE, which was already raised in the Quarterly Report to 30 June 2016 from a moderate decrease to a slight decrease, was once more exceeded. In the Annual Report 2015, a moderate decrease in RoCE was foreseen. The rate achieved by the Automotive segment in 2016 was therefore once again well above the minimum target of 26%. Motorcycles segment Deliveries to customers: solid increase In a highly favourable market environment, most notably in Europe, BMW Motorrad reported a solid 5.9% increase, with 145,032 units sold (2015: 136,963 units). These figures benefited from unexpectedly good sales figures for Europe and Latin America. The forecast increase, upgraded in the Quarterly Report to 30 June 2016 from slight to solid, was therefore realised. In the Annual Report 2015, only a slight increase in deliveries to customers had been foreseen for the Motorcycles segment. Return on capital employed: slight increase The Motorcycles segment generated a return on capital employed (RoCE) of 33.0% in the year under report (2015: 31.6%; + 1.4 percentage points), slightly above the previous year, mainly reflecting effective working capital management and the improvement in earnings. The reported figures also benefited from the trend towards high-value models and the new brand strategy initiated in 2014. The forecast RoCE, which had already been changed from a slight decrease to “at the previous year’s level” in the Quarterly Report to 30 June 2016, was therefore once again exceeded. In the Annual Report 2015, a slight decrease in RoCE had been foreseen. Research and Development www.bmwgroup.com/innovation Research and development are of central importance for the BMW Group as a premium manufacturer. As part of the Efficient Dynamics strategy, continual efforts are undertaken to improve energy efficiency and reduce emissions across the full range of automobiles and motorcycles. In line with its Connected Drive strategy, the BMW Group is engaged in work on the connectedness of driver, vehicle and the outside world. The Group seeks to take a leading position in the field of autonomous driving. At 31 December 2016, a total of 13,103 people at 13 locations in five countries worldwide were employed in the BMW Group’s research and innovation network. Research and development expenditure totalled € 5,164 million during the year under report, in line with the previous twelve-month period (2015: € 5,169 million; – 0.0%). At 5.5%, the research and development expenditure ratio was also practically identical to that of the preceding year (2015: 5.6%). The ratio of capitalised development costs to total research and development expenditure for the period (capitalisation ratio) was 40.5% (2015: 39.9%). Amortisation of capitalised development costs totalled € 1,222 million (2015: € 1,166 million; + 4.8%). Further information on research and development expenditure is provided in the “Report on Economic Position (Results of Operations)” and in note 7 to the Group Financial Statements. Given the pace of technological change, collaboration in the field of research and development is customary in the automotive industry. The BMW Group also enters into collaboration arrangements with selected partners. The aim of these research and development activities, which may also include cross-sector cooperation, is to help find innovative solutions for individual mobility. The focus is on future-oriented technologies such as digitalisation and alternative drive systems. see note 7 51 Expertise in drivetrain technology The BMW Group is consistently extending its portfolio of electrically powered vehicles. At the end of 2016, it included the BMWi3 all-electric, battery-powered vehicle, six plug-in hybrid vehicles for the global market, and an additional plug-in hybrid exclusively developed for the Chinese market. In 2016, an additional version of the BMWi3 was launched, featuring significantly greater battery capacity. The vehicle is also available with or without a range extender. During the reporting year, plans were laid for both the first all-electric MINI and for an electrically powered BMW X3. In 2017, the new BMW 5 Series and the MINI Countryman are both due to be launched as plug-in hybrid versions. A roadster version of the BMWi8 has also been announced for 2018. With its C-evolution, BMW Motorrad presented in 2016 the second edition of an all-electric “Maxi Scooter” with greatly improved range and higher top speed. For the medium and long term, the BMW Group is also developing a fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV). The fuel cell electric drive system, which converts hydrogen to electricity and steam, combines locally emission-free, electrically powered driving with the dynamic flair typical of the BMW brand, capability for covering long distances, and short refuelling times. Battery and fuel cell technology can be combined in one vehicle. At the same time, the BMW Group continues to work on enhancing its existing range of highly efficient combustion engines. 2016 saw the launch of the new BMW 7 Series, featuring a newly developed inline 6-cylinder diesel engine that combines high performance with low fuel consumption. The BMW 1 and 2 Series M Performance models were presented with a new, powerful inline 6-cylinder petrol engine in 2016. Driver assistance systems, highly and fully automated driving The new BMW 5 Series offers drivers extensive support with a variety of assistance systems. It is fitted with a stereo camera as standard, which monitors the vehicle’s environment together with optionally available radar and ultrasound sensors. New features in the BMW 5 Series include an avoidance assistant, a crossing-traffic warning, a lane-change assistant and a lane control assistant with active side collision protection, which monitors the driving lanes and developments next to the vehicle and actively supports the driver in the event of imminent collision with a corrective steering intervention. With extended functions built into the optionally available Active Cruise Control (ACC) and the steering and lane control assistant, the BMW 5 Series represents a further step towards automated driving, including recognition of speed limits, which the optional Speed Limit Assist shows the driver. The assistance system supports the driver in keeping a correct distance at speeds up to 210 km / h as well as at accelerating and braking. These features offer drivers a significant benefit in terms of convenience, particularly at low speeds and in slow-moving traffic. The optional Remote Parking feature of the BMW 5 Series Sedan enables drivers to manoeuvre the vehicle into the tightest of parking spaces using a remote-control car key. At the same time, the BMW Group is conducting research into highly automated systems that do not need to be permanently monitored by the driver and fully automated systems that no longer require the driver to monitor them at all. At the end of 2016, some 600 BMW Group employees were engaged in the development of highly automated driving technologies. Beginning in 2017, the BMW Group plans to concentrate its expertise in the field of vehicle connectivity and automated driving at one location. 52 Combined Management Report Report on Economic Position Review of Operations Research and Development BMW Connected digital platform presented With BMW Connected, the BMW Group presented a comprehensive digital concept that facilitates individual mobility. Based on a flexible platform, BMW Connected seamlessly combines the vehicle with the digital life of the user through user devices such as smartphones. The functions of existing BMW ConnectedDrive apps will be integrated in BMW Connected. The security and anonymisation of data have the highest priority for the BMW Group, both internally and for its customers. Digital connectivity has also become a key topic for the Group’s motorcycles. With its optionally available “Intelligent Emergency Call”, BMW Motorrad has announced that eCall for urgent help in case of emergency or accidents will also be added as a feature of its motorcycles as from 2017. Next generation of the AirTouch virtual touchscreen The BMW Group made further progress in the field of interaction between the driver and the vehicle during the year under report. Following up on BMW Gesture Control, which is already available for the new BMW 5 and 7 Series, in 2016 the Group presented its enhanced AirTouch system, which enables drivers to use simple gestures with an open hand to activate command fields on a large panorama screen on the dashboard. At the beginning of 2017, the BMW HoloActive Touch system was presented to the public for the first time. The innovative interface between driver and vehicle is similar to a virtual touchscreen, which is operated using finger gestures on a screen that appears to float freely in space. Extreme lightweight construction in the BMW HP4 BMW Motorrad demonstrated with the exclusive BMW HP4 RACE experimental motorcycle how extreme lightweight construction can be realised based on carbon fibre technology. Among other features, this motorcycle, which is fit for racing, is equipped with a highly innovative frame structure made of pure carbon as well as carbon wheel-rims. Numerous awards for innovations The BMW Group won over 50 national and international awards during the year under report. Among other honours, the BMW 7 Series was named World Luxury Car at the renowned World Car Awards. At the “International Engine of the Year Award”, the most prestigious engine competition worldwide, the drivetrain of the BMWi8 was winner in the 1.4- to 1.8-litre category. At the Automotive Innovations Award, jointly awarded by the Center of Automotive Management and the auditing and consulting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers, BMW drivetrains were adjudged to be the most innovative conventional systems across all models. The BMWi3 won the “Golden Steering Wheel” award in the “Alternative drives” category. In 2016, the BMW Group won numerous design awards, including the International Forum Design Awards for its Rolls-Royce Dawn, MINI Clubman, MINI Convertible, BMW M2, BMW X1 and BMW 7 Series. Sustainability www.bmwgroup.com/responsibility Economic success, the responsible use of resources and the assumption of social responsibilities form the basis for long-term growth within the BMW Group. The Group secures the future of its business model through sustainable activity. In promoting sustainability, the BMW Group concentrates on three areas: — the development of products and services for sustainable individual mobility (for example electric mobility and services such as DriveNow and ReachNow) — the efficient use of resources along the entire value chain — responsibility towards employees and society in general Through its sustainability policy, the BMW Group is supporting the achievement of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), which were adopted in September 2015. Further information on the subject of sustainability within the BMW Group and related topics is provided in the Sustainable Value Report 2016, published online at www.bmwgroup.com. The Sustainable Value Report is drawn up in accordance with the Guidelines of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI G4), the most widely used set of guidelines for sustainability reporting worldwide. The Sustainable Value Report corresponds to the “comprehensive” option, in which all relevant information and indicators of the aspects identified as essential are reported on. It will be published at the same time as the Annual Report 2016. 59 Social dialogue and materiality analysis as a basis for sustainability management The BMW Group is in continual dialogue with a large number of stakeholders, both in Germany and abroad. Dialogue helps the Company to recognise global trends at an early stage, achieve sustainability objectives more effectively and strengthen social commitment. In the course of this dialogue, the BMW Group gains a clear picture of how current trends are changing the business environment and what role the BMW Group can play. For example, stakeholder dialogue events on the topic of urban mobility were held in Seattle, Boston, Madrid, Tokyo and Barcelona during the period under report. In order to identify important sustainability topics at an early stage, the BMW Group also conducts materiality analyses on a regular basis. Moreover, social challenges are continually monitored and analysed in order to gauge their significance, from the point of view of both external and internal stakeholders. The materiality analysis is used to create a materiality matrix, which is used as a basis to check the strategic direction of sustainability management. The materiality matrix is described in greater detail in the Sustainable Value Report 2016. Although energy and water consumption per vehicle produced rose slightly, both the use of resources and the production-related emissions fell by an average of 4.9% in 2016. However, the slight increase in energy and water consumption per vehicle produced gave rise to additional costs totalling € 2.8 million. The reduction in resource consumption and production-related emissions per vehicle produced since 2006 corresponds to a cost saving of € 155.3 million. Sustainability along the value chain Sustainability criteria also play a key role when selecting and assessing suppliers as well as in the field of transport logistics. The BMW Group has therefore integrated a comprehensive sustainability management strategy in its purchasing processes. The positive business performance in recent years has also caused a significant rise in the Group’s transportation requirements worldwide. The principle adhered to by the BMW Group that “production follows the market” is an effective method of significantly reducing the need for transportation, therefore keeping CO2 emissions as low as possible. Automotive segment Deliveries to customers: slight increase expected The BMW Group expects a further year-on-year increase in sales of BMW, MINI and Rolls-Royce brand vehicles and aims to achieve again in 2017 a leading position in the global premium segment. Balanced growth in major sales regions will help to even out volatilities in individual markets. Assuming economic conditions do not deteriorate, deliveries to customers are forecast to rise slightly to a new high (2016: 2,367,6031 units) in 2017. Important contributions to continued growth will come in particular from new models. The all-new BMW 5 Series Sedan has been available since mid-February 2017. The BMW 5 Series iPerformance and M Performance models followed in March. The BMW 5 Series iPerformance model as a plug-in hybrid is now available worldwide. The model revisions of the BMW 4 Series and the BMW M4 Coupé and Convertible were also launched in March. The new BMW 5 Series Touring is scheduled for launch in midJune. The second generation of its highly successful MINI Countryman model was introduced in February. Towards the middle of year, a John Cooper Works and a plug-in hybrid will be added to the MINI Countryman range. Further new models are planned for the second half of 2017. Fleet carbon dioxide emissions2 : slight decrease expected The BMW Group is continuing its efforts to reduce fuel consumption and carbon dioxide emissions. According to forecasts, carbon dioxide emissions for the vehicle fleet will decrease slightly during the outlook period, thus continuing the trend seen in previous years (2016: 124 grams CO2 / km). Revenues: slight increase expected Automotive segment revenues are expected to rise slightly in line with sales volume. The Company expects that segment revenues will increase slightly in 2017 (2016: € 86,424 million). Macroeconomic risks and opportunities Economic conditions influence business performance and hence the results of operations, financial position and net assets of the BMW Group. Unforeseen disruptions in global economic ties can have highly unpredictable effects. Macroeconomic risks can lead to reduced purchasing power in the countries and regions involved and lead to reduced demand for the products and services offered by the BMW Group. If macroeconomic risks were to materialise, they could – due to sales volume fluctuations – have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. Overall, the risk level attached to macroeconomic risks is classified as high. Macroeconomic risks are evaluated on the basis of historical data and by means of a cash-flow-at-risk approach, supplemented by scenario analyses. Given the political events that have occurred during the financial year under report, future global economic developments are currently subject to a high degree of uncertainty, in particular with respect to potential barriers that could affect global trade. The outcome of the elections in the USA in November 2016, the planned exit of the UK from the EU and possible election wins for anti-globalisation parties in the EU in the coming years could result in higher tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade. 91 The possible introduction of trade barriers by the new US administration could have an adverse impact on the BMW Group’s operations in the form of less favourable conditions for importing vehicles. Moreover, countermeasures by the USA’s trading partners could slow down global economic growth and consequently have an adverse impact on the export of vehicles produced in the USA. The BMW Group’s production strategy involves local production both in the USA and in other important trading regions. The strategy of regional production reduces the existing risk of trade barriers. Nevertheless, any increase in trade barriers would have an adverse impact on the BMW Group. The Brexit plan could have a long-term adverse impact on the BMW Group, particularly as a result of increased trade barriers in relation to the European single market. In the short and medium term, too, uncertainty regarding the outcome of the negotiations with the EU could lead to reduced customer spending and trigger further unfavourable currency effects. Unresolved structural problems in the eurozone, a potential increase in anti-globalisation political sentiment and a possible renewed economic downturn could potentially hold down growth prospects for the BMW Group. European integration with a unified economic and currency area remains an important pillar of economic stability in Europe. The transition of the Chinese economy from an investment-driven to a consumer-driven market is likely to entail slower growth rates and greater instability on financial markets. If the Chinese economy were to grow at a significantly slower pace than expected, the consequence could be not only a decline in automobile sales, but also, potentially, lower demand for raw materials, which would have a negative impact above all on emerging economies such as Brazil or Russia. Any renewed drop in raw material prices could result in lower demand from these countries. The threat of turmoil on the Chinese property, stock and banking markets and an overly rapid hike in interest rates by the US Federal Reserve pose considerable risks for global financial market stability. Furthermore, increasing political unrest, military conflicts, terrorist activities, natural disasters or pandemics could have a lasting negative impact on the global economy and international capital markets. The BMW Group counters macroeconomic risks primarily by internationalising its sales and production structures, in order to minimise the extent to which earnings depend on risks in individual countries and regions. Flexible sales and production processes across the BMW Group increase the ability to react quickly to regional economic developments. Should the global economy develop significantly better than reflected in the outlook, macroeconomic opportunities could arise with a potentially favourable impact on the revenues and earnings of the BMW Group. Stronger Chinese growth, economy-boosting structural reforms within the eurozone, growth stimulus through infrastructure investment in the USA or more robust consumer spending by US households despite rising financing costs, could result in significantly stronger sales volume growth, reduced competitive pressures and improved pricing. Macroeconomic opportunities that could generate a sustainable impact on earnings are currently classified by the BMW Group as insignificant. Strategic and sector risks and opportunities Changes in legislation and regulatory requirements Abrupt introduction of tightened new laws and regulations represents a significant risk for the automobile industry, particularly in relation to emissions, safety and consumer protection, as well as taxes on vehicle purchases and use. Country- and sector-specific trade barriers can also change at short notice. Unfavourable developments in any of these areas can necessitate significantly higher levels of investment and ongoing expenses or influence customer behaviour. Risks from changes in legislation and regulatory requirements could have a low impact on earnings over the two-year assessment period. The risk level attached to these risks is classified as medium. The BMW Group sees a clear move towards increasingly stringent vehicle emissions regulations, particularly for conventional drive systems, not only in the developed markets of Europe and North America, but also in emerging markets such as China. The introduction of new measurement procedures to represent standard driving cycles, combined with significantly lower emissions thresholds, represents a major challenge for the automotive sector. The BMW Group counters this risk with its Efficient Dynamics concept and continues to play a pioneering role within the premium segment in reducing both fuel consumption and emissions. Electric drive systems are being built into a growing number of models, namely in BMWi vehicles since 2013 and – following the introduction of the X5 in 2015 – in models using plug-in-hybrid technologies, thus contributing to the BMW Group’s effort to comply with statutory carbon emissions requirements. 92 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities Further risks can result from the tightening of existing import and export regulations. These lead primarily to additional expenses, but can also restrict the import and export of vehicles or parts. Increased taxes on high-value consumer goods have also been proposed in a number of regions. Taxes of this kind in major markets of the BMW Group, such as China, could have a negative impact on regional demand and margins on BMW Group vehicles in the automobile segments concerned. Setting the regulatory framework for innovative mobility solutions and providing state-funded incentives are important prerequisites for developing mobility services and introducing product innovations, such as autonomous driving. If the necessary public measures are implemented globally at a faster pace than expected, opportunities will arise for the BMW Group to expand new business segments more quickly. Alternative mobility services, such as DriveNow, ChargeNow and ParkNow, could benefit from supportive regulatory measures, for example through systematic application in German cities of car-sharing legislation that comes into force in September 2017. Access restrictions for inefficient vehicles with lower environmental standards could provide a competitive advantage and hence an opportunity for BMW Group vehicles equipped with Efficient Dynamics technologies and for BMWi and iPerformance vehicles with alternative drive systems. The market acceptance and sales volumes of product innovations that are either planned for the future or have recently been launched could turn out to be greater than predicted in the outlook. Good examples of such opportunities are implementation of the 360° ELECTRIC portfolio in the field of electric mobility, achieving growth in the field of mobility services, and collaborating with Toyota on developing a hydrogen fuel cell system. The BMW Group’s earnings could also be positively affected in the short to medium term by changes in trading policies. A possible reduction in tariff barriers, import restrictions or direct excise duties could lower the cost of materials for the BMW Group, also enabling products and services to be offered to customers at lower prices. Further opportunities from changes in legislation and regulatory requirements compared to the outlook for the earnings performance of the BMW Group are classified as insignificant. Market development In addition to the potential impact of macroeconomic factors and sector-specific political framework conditions, it is also extremely difficult to predict the impact of increasingly fierce competition among established manufacturers and the emergence of new competitors. Unforeseen consumer preferences and changes in how brands are perceived can give rise to opportunities and risks. If market risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level is classified as high. Fierce competition, particularly in Western Europe, the USA and China, is a potential reason for lower demand and for fluctuations in the regional distribution and composition of demand for vehicles and mobility services. Greater competition could potentially put pressure on selling prices and margins. Changes in customer behaviour can also be brought about by changes in public opinion, values, environmental issues and fuel or energy prices. Selling price and margin risks are measured using a scenario approach, based on a bottom-up survey of the key sales markets and an analysis of historical data. The BMW Group’s flexible selling and production processes enable risks to be reduced and opportunities in market and product segments to be taken. Local restrictions affecting product usage in specific sectors may limit BMW Group sales volumes in individual markets. In some urban areas, for instance, local measures have been or are being introduced which impose entry restrictions, road use charges or, in some situations, highly restrictive registration rules. These restrictions may affect local demand for the BMW Group vehicles affected and hence have negative repercussions on sales volume and margins. The BMW Group’s endeavours to counter this risk include offering locally emission-free vehicles (such as the BMWi3), which benefit from state subsidies and exemption rules. New opportunities are continuously being sought to create even greater added value for customers than currently expected, and thereby realise significant opportunities with respect to sales volumes and pricing. Further development of the product and mobility portfolio and expansion in growth regions are seen as the most important growth opportunities for the BMW Group in the medium to long term. Continued growth depends above all on the ability to develop innovative products and bring them to market. The range of services on offer was further expanded in 2016, including the establishment of new mobility services by ReachNow in North America and the expansion of the DriveNow offering introduced in additional European cities. Furthermore, vehicle-related services were brought onto the market. The new BMW 5 and 93 7 Series models, for instance, include the optional Driving Assistant Plus which, as a future-oriented product innovation, offers the comfort of partially autonomous driving. The BMW Group does not expect these opportunities to have a material earnings impact over the two-year assessment period compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Risks and opportunities relating to operations Risks and opportunities relating to production and technology Risks relating to production and technology often manifest themselves in the form of potential sources of production interruptions or additional expenses necessary to comply with quality standards under changed environmental conditions. If risks from the production and technology category were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level attached to production and technology is classified as high. Production stoppages and downtimes, in particular due to fire, but also to machinery and tooling-related breakdowns, IT disruptions, power failures, transportation and logistical disruptions, pose risks, against which the BMW Group has put suitable measures in place. Production structures and processes are designed from the outset with a view to minimising any potential damage and the probability of occurrence. The broad array of measures taken include technical fire protection solutions, land development measures including contingencies against flooding when facilities are expanded or new buildings added, the interchangeability of production facilities, preventative maintenance, the ability to manage spare parts across sites, and predictive planning of transportation alternatives. The risk level is also reduced by deploying flexible working hour models and working time accounts, but also as appropriate through split arrangements or by building engine types at additional sites. This makes it possible to recover quickly any backlog arising from production interruptions. Moreover, risks arising from interruptions and production downtime due to fire are also appropriately insured with insurance companies of good credit standing. In order to attain the outstanding level of quality expected of the BMW Group’s products and correspondingly high external ratings (e. g. for product safety) and reduce statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations, it may be necessary to incur a higher level of expenditure than originally forecast. In addition, availability of products may be limited, particularly at the start of production of new vehicles. These risks are mitigated through regular audits and the continual improvement of the quality management system, which ensures a high standard of quality. The BMW Group also recognises appropriate accounting provisions for statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations. Such provisions reduce the risk to earnings, as they are already included in the outlook. Further information on risks in conjunction with provisions for statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations is provided in note 31 to the Group Financial Statements. The BMW Group sees opportunities relating to production and technology primarily in the competitive edge accruing from mastering new and complex technologies. Opportunities could arise as a result of productor process-related technological innovations, as well as from organisational changes designed to improve efficiency and increase competitiveness. In the field of lightweight construction, for example, carbon is being utilised in high volumes for the first time in the automobile industry for the production of the BMWi3. In 2015, the BMW Group then introduced carbon for the BMW 7 Series. This has generated competitive benefits in the form of lower fuel consumption and better driving dynamics through reduced vehicle weight. Given the long lead times involved in developing new products and processes, additional opportunities are expected to have insignificant impact on earnings during the forecast period. Risks and opportunities relating to purchasing Purchasing risks relate primarily to supply risks caused by the failure of a supplier to deliver as well as risks associated with the quality of bought-in parts. Production problems incurred by suppliers could have adverse consequences for the BMW Group, ranging from increased expenditure through to production interruptions and a corresponding reduction in sales volume. The increasingly complex nature of the supplier network, especially at the level of lower tier suppliers, whose operations can only be indirectly influenced by the BMW Group, is a further potential cause of downtimes at supplier locations. Purchasing risks, if materialised, could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level attached to purchasing risks is classified as medium. Close cooperation between carmakers and automotive suppliers in the development and production of vehicles and the provision of services generates economic benefits, but also raises levels of dependency. Potential reasons for the failure of individual suppliers could include non-compliance with sustainability or quality standards, lack of financial strength on the part of a supplier, the occurrence of natural hazards, IT-related risks, fires or insufficient supply of raw materials. As part of the supplier pre-selection process, the BMW Group is careful to ensure compliance with the sustainability standards stipulated for the supplier see note 31 94 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities network, including the requirement to comply with internationally recognised human rights and applicable labour and social standards. The principal tool for ensuring compliance with the BMW Group Sustainability Standard is a three-stage risk management system for sustainability. In addition, the technical and financial capabilities of suppliers – especially those supplying for modular-based production – are monitored. Supplier sites are assessed for exposure to natural hazards, such as floods or earthquakes, in order to identify supply risks at an early stage and implement appropriate safeguards. Fire risks at series suppliers are evaluated by means of questionnaires and selective site inspections. In order to minimise supply risks, the BMW Group works hard to reduce the input of raw materials or to use alternative raw materials as a substitute. The BMW Group pays particular attention to the quality of the parts built into its vehicles. In order to attain a very high level of quality, it may become necessary to invest in new technological concepts or discontinue planned innovations, with the consequence that the cost of materials could exceed levels accounted for in the outlook. By monitoring and developing global supplier markets, the BMW Group continuously strives to increase its competitiveness by working together with the world’s best product and service providers. Within the Purchasing and Supplier Network opportunities emerge above all in the area of global sourcing through increased efficiency and the use of innovations developed by suppliers, which can lead to a broader range of products. Introduction of new and innovative production technologies and location-specific cost factors, in particular through local supplier structures in close proximity to new and existing BMW Group production plants, can lead to lower cost of materials for the BMW Group. The integration of previously unidentified innovations from the supplier market into the product range is a further source of opportunities. The BMW Group offers innovative suppliers numerous possibilities for creating specific contractual arrangements which are attractive for those developing innovative solutions. At regular intervals, the BMW Group honours its most inventive suppliers with the Supplier Innovation Award. The BMW Group does not expect these opportunities to have a significant earnings impact over the two-year assessment period as compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Risks and opportunities relating to sales and marketing The BMW Group employs a global sales network, primarily comprising independent dealers, branches, subsidiaries and importers to sell its products and services. Any threat to the continued activities of parts of the sales network would entail risks for the BMW Group. If sales and marketing risks were to materialise, they are likely to have low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level is classified as low. New opportunities for the BMW Group’s brands are opening up in particular as a result of developments in the field of digital communication and connectivity. Additional opportunities could also arise if new sales channels contribute to greater brand reach to additional customer groups than currently envisaged in the forecast. Digital communication and connectivity enables consumers to be reached on a more targeted and individualised basis, thus strengthening long-term relationships and brand loyalty. The outcome is often a more intense product and brand experience for customers, which could lead to higher sales volume and have a positive impact on revenues and earnings. The BMW Group invests in advanced marketing concepts in order to intensify customer relationships. In 2016, for example, customers in the United Kingdom were able to access an online sales platform, enabling them to select, finance and buy their vehicle online. The BMW Group’s brands are also present on numerous platforms, such as Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. The BMW Group estimates the earnings impact as insignificant over the two-year assessment period as compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. 95 Information, data protection and IT The advance of digitalisation across all areas of the business raises the need for increasingly stringent requirements for the confidentiality, integrity and availability of electronically processed data and in information technology (IT) in general. The increased threat of cybercrime has changed the risk exposure of the BMW Group. In addition to intellectual property theft, BMW Group must protect itself against attacks on data integrity and availability. At the same time, regulations covering the handling of personal data are also becoming more stringent, for example with the adoption of the EU General Data Protection Regulation by the European Parliament in April 2016. If information, data protection and IT risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. Risk levels attached to these risks are classified as high. In addition to IT attacks and direct physical intervention, lack of knowledge or misconduct on the part of employees may also represent a danger to the confidentiality, integrity and availability of data and systems. Direct consequences of information, data protection and IT risks include expenses required for rapid data, information and systems recovery. Negative impacts on operational performance due to the non-availability of products and services or disruptions in spare-part or vehicle production could also be possible. A further indirect result could be reputational damage. Great importance is attached to protecting the confidentiality, integrity and availability of business information and employee and customer data, for instance against unauthorised access and misuse. Data security based on the International Standard ISO / IEC 27001 is an integral component of all business processes. As part of risk management procedures, data protection, information and IT risks are systematically documented, allocated appropriate measures by the departments responsible and regularly monitored in terms of threat level and risk mitigation. Regular analyses and controls and rigorous security management ensure an appropriate level of security. Despite regular testing and preventative security measures, it is impossible to eliminate risks completely in this area. All employees are required to treat carefully information such as confidential business, customer and employee data, to use securely information systems and handle risks with transparency. Group-wide requirements are documented in a comprehensive set of principles, guidelines and instructions, such as, for example, the Binding Corporate Rules for handling of employee data. Regular communication and information activities create a high degree of security and risk awareness among employees involved. Employees receive training to ensure compliance with the applicable requirements and in-house rules. The BMW Group protects its intellectual property as well as customer and employee data in cooperations and business partnerships by stipulating clear instructions with regard to data protection and the use of information technology. Information pertaining to key areas of expertise as well as sensitive personal data are subject to particularly strict security measures. Technical data protection incorporates industry-wide standards and best practices. Responsibility for data and information protection lies for each Group entity with the Board of Management or relevant management team. The use of information technology in new products and services, production or communication with customers opens up new opportunities. Under the slogan Industry 4.0, new approaches to production are being tested which could generate significant improvements in process and energy efficiency. The range of services and apps on offer to customers via BMW ConnectedDrive is constantly being expanded and updated. The purchase together with other companies of the firm HERE lays the foundation for the next generation of mobility and location-based services. For the automobile sector, it serves as the basis for new customer-oriented functions, such as innovative assistance systems through to fully automated driving. The BMW Group expects these opportunities to have an insignificant earnings impact over the two-year assessment period compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. 96 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities Financial risks and risks relating to the use of financial instruments Currency risks and opportunities As an internationally operating enterprise, the BMW Group conducts business in a variety of currencies, thus giving rise to currency risks and opportunities. A substantial portion of Group revenue generation, purchasing and funding occur outside the eurozone (particularly in China and the USA). Cash-flow-at-risk models and scenario analyses are used to measure currency risks and opportunities. If currency risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level attached to currency risks is medium. Significant opportunities can arise if currency developments are favourable for the BMW Group. Operational currency management is based on the results of currency risk analyses. The BMW Group manages currency risk at both the strategic (medium and long term) and operational level (short and medium term). Medium- and long-term measures include increasing production volumes and purchase volumes in foreign currency regions (natural hedging). Currency risks are managed in the short to medium term and for operational purposes by means of hedging on financial markets. Hedging transactions are entered into only with financial partners of good credit standing. Opportunities are also secured through the use of options during specific market phases. Risks and opportunities relating to raw materials As a large-scale manufacturing company, the BMW Group is exposed to purchase price risks, particularly in relation to raw materials used in vehicle production. Basis for the analysis of raw material price risk are planned purchases of raw materials and components containing those raw materials. If risks relating to raw material prices were to materialise, they would likely have a low earnings impact over the twoyear assessment period. A low risk level is attached to these risks. Significant opportunities could arise if raw material prices developed favourably for the BMW Group. Changes in commodity prices are monitored on the basis of a well-defined management process. The principal objective is to increase planning reliability for the BMW Group. Price fluctuations for precious metals (platinum, palladium, rhodium) and non-ferrous metals (aluminium, copper, lead), and, to some extent, on steel and steel ingredients (iron ore, cokecoal) and energy (gas, electricity) are hedged using financial derivatives and supply contracts with fixed pricing arrangements. Liquidity risks The major part of the Financial Services segment’s credit financing and lease business is refinanced on capital markets. Liquidity risks may be reflected in rising refinancing costs. They may also manifest themselves in restricted access to funds as a consequence of the general market situation or the failure of individual banks. If liquidity risks were to materialise, they would be likely to have a low earnings impact over the twoyear assessment period. The risk of incurring liquidity risk, including the risk of the BMW Group’s rating being downgraded and any ensuing deterioration in financing conditions, is classified as low. Based on the experience of the financial crisis, a minimum liquidity concept has been developed and is rigorously adhered to. Use of the “matched funding principle” to finance the Financial Services segment’s operations eliminates liquidity risks to a large extent. Solvency is assured at all times throughout the BMW Group by maintaining a liquidity reserve and by the broad diversification of refinancing sources. Regular measurement and monitoring ensure that cash inflows and outflows from transactions in varying maturity cycles and currencies offset each other. The relevant procedures are incorporated in the BMW Group’s target liquidity concept. The liquidity position is monitored continuously and managed by means of a cash flow requirement and sourcing forecast system in place throughout the Group. A diversified refinancing strategy reduces dependency on any specific type of instrument. Moreover, the BMW Group’s solid financial and earnings position results in the high creditworthiness ratings issued by internationally recognised rating agencies. A description of the methods applied for risk measurement and hedging in conjunction with currency and commodity risks is provided in note 37 to the Group Financial Statements. If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group as hedges are accounted for as hedging relationships. Further information on risks in conjunction with financial instruments is provided in note 37 to the Group Financial Statements. see note 37 see note 37 97 Risks and opportunities relating to pension obligations Pension obligations are influenced in particular by fluctuations of market yields on corporate bonds, as well as by other economic and demographic parameters. Opportunities and risks arise depending on the nature and scale of changes in these parameters. If risks relating to pension obligations materialised, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level relating to pension obligations is classified as medium. Within a favourable capital market environment, the return generated by pension assets may exceed expectations and reduce the deficit of the relevant pension plans. This could have a significantly favourable impact on the net asset position of the BMW Group. Future pension payments are discounted by reference to market yields on high-quality corporate bonds. These yields are subject to market fluctuation and therefore influence the level of pension obligations. Changes in other parameters, such as rises in inflation and longer life expectancy, also impact pension obligations and payments. Most of the BMW Group’s pension obligations are managed in external pension funds or trust arrangements and the related assets are kept separate from those of the Group. The amount of funds required to finance pension payments out of operations in the future is therefore substantially reduced, since most of the Group’s pension obligations are settled out of pension fund assets. The pension assets of the BMW Group comprise interest-bearing securities, equities, real estate and other investment classes. Assets held by pension funds and trust arrangements are monitored continuously and managed on a risk-and-yield basis. Diversification of investments also helps to mitigate risk. In order to reduce fluctuations in pension funding shortfalls, investments are structured to match the timing of pension payments and the expected pattern of pension obligations. Remeasurements on the liability and fund asset sides are recognised, net of deferred taxes, in “Other comprehensive income” and hence directly in equity (within revenue reserves). Further information on risks in conjunction with pension provisions is provided in note 30 to the Group Financial Statements. Risks and opportunities relating to the Financial Services segment The categories of risk relating to the provision of financial services comprise credit and counterparty risk, residual value risk, interest rate risk, operational risks and liquidity risk. Evaluation of liquidity risk for the Financial Services segment is included in the liquidity risk category for the Group as a whole. The segment’s total risk exposure was covered at all times during the 2016 financial year by the available risk-covering assets, thus ensuring the Financial Services segment’s risk-bearing capacity. Credit and counterparty risks and opportunities Credit and counterparty default risk arises within the Financial Services segment if a contractual partner (i. e. a customer or dealer) either becomes unable or only partially able to fulfil its contractual obligations, such that lower income is generated or losses incurred. If credit and counterparty risks were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level is classified as medium. The BMW Group classifies potential opportunities in this area as significant. As part of its credit and counterparty risk management system, the Financial Services segment uses a variety of rating systems in order to assess the creditworthiness of its contractual partners. Credit risks are managed at the time of the initial credit decision on the basis of a calculation of the present value of standard risk costs and subsequently, during the term of the credit, by using a range of risk provisioning techniques to cover risks resulting from changes in customer creditworthiness. In this context, individual customers are classified by category each month on the basis of their current contractual status, and appropriate levels of allowance recognised in accordance with that classification. If economies develop more favourably than assumed in the outlook, credit losses may be reduced, leading to a positive earnings impact. see note 30 98 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities Residual value risks and opportunities Risks and opportunities arise in conjunction with lease contracts if the market value of a leased vehicle at the end of the contractual term of a lease differs from the residual value estimated at the inception of the lease and factored into the lease payments. A residual value risk exists if the expected market value of the vehicle at the end of the contractual term is lower than its estimated residual value at the date the contract is entered into. If residual value risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. A high and medium earnings impact would then arise for the affected Financial Services and Automotive segments, respectively. The risk level is classified as medium for the Group as a whole. Opportunities can arise out of a positive deviation between the actual market and the original residual value forecast. The BMW Group classifies potential residual value opportunities as significant. Each vehicle’s estimated residual value is calculated on the basis of historical external and internal data and used to estimate the expected market value of the vehicle at the end of the contractual period. As part of the process of managing residual value risks, a calculation is performed at the inception of each contract to determine the net present value of risk costs. Market developments are observed throughout the contractual period and the risk assessment updated. Interest rate risks and opportunities Interest rate risks in the Financial Services segment relate to potential losses caused by changes in market interest rates. They can arise when fixed interest rate periods for assets and liabilities recognised in the balance sheet do not match. If risks relating to interest rate risk were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level is classified as low. The BMW Group classifies potential interest rate opportunities as material. Interest rate risks in the Financial Services line of business are managed by raising refinancing funds with matching maturities and by employing interest-rate derivatives. If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group are accounted for as hedging instruments. Further information on risks in conjunction with financial instruments is provided in note 37 to the Group Financial Statements. Operational risks in the Financial Services segment Operational risks are defined in the Financial Services segment as the risk of losses arising as a consequence of the inappropriateness or failure of internal procedures (process risks), people (personnel-related risks), systems (infrastructure and IT risks) and external events (external risks). These four categories of risk also include related legal and reputation risks. The comprehensive recording and measurement of risk scenarios, loss events and countermeasures in the operational risk management system provides the basis for a systematic analysis and management of potential or materialised operational risks. Annual self-assessments are also carried out. If operational risks were to materialise, they would be likely to have a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level is classified as low. Legal risks Compliance with the law is a basic prerequisite for the success of the BMW Group. Current legislation provides the binding framework for the BMW Group’s various business activities around the world. As a result of its worldwide operations, the BMW Group is exposed to a wide range of legal risks. If legal risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level attached to significant identified legal risks is classified as medium. However, it cannot be ruled out that new legal risks, as yet unforeseen, could materialise that could have a high earnings impact for the BMW Group. The growing international scope of the BMW Group’s operations and of business interdependencies in general, combined with the variety and complexity of legal provisions, including increasingly import and export regulations, give rise to an increased risk that laws may be violated simply through lack of awareness. The BMW Group has established a Compliance Organisation aimed at ensuring that its representative bodies, managers and staff act lawfully at all times. Further information on the BMW Group’s Compliance Organisation can be found in the section “Corporate Governance”. see note 37 99 Like all internationally operating entities, the BMW Group is confronted with legal disputes relating in particular to warranty claims, product liability, infringements of protected rights and proceedings initiated by government agencies. Any of these matters could, amongst others, have an adverse impact on the Group’s reputation. Such proceedings are typical for the sector and can arise as a consequence of realigning product or purchasing strategies to suit changed market conditions. Particularly in the US market, class action lawsuits and product liability risks can have substantial financial consequences and cause damage to the Group’s public image. The application of more rigorous consumer regulations or the stricter interpretation of existing regulations could result in a greater number of recalls. The high quality of the Group’s products, which is ensured by regular quality audits and ongoing improvement measures, helps reduce this risk. The BMW Group recognises appropriate levels of provision for lawsuits. A part of these risks is insured where this makes business sense. Some risks, however, either cannot be estimated or only to a limited extent. In other cases, the incurrence of expenses or losses may be considered unlikely. Such items are reported as contingent liabilities. It cannot be ruled out, however, that losses from damages could arise that are either not covered or not fully covered by insurance policies or provisions, or as contingent liabilities. In accordance with IAS 37 (Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets), the required information is not provided if the BMW Group concludes that disclosure of the information could seriously prejudice the outcome of the relevant legal proceedings. Further information on contingent liabilities is provided in note 36 to the Group Financial Statements. Overall assessment of the risk and opportunities situation The overall risk assessment is based on a consolidated view of all significant individual risks and opportunities. The exposure to risks in the individual risk categories is essentially stable. In view of the growing importance of data and IT systems for its business, the BMW Group sees an increased need for protection in the area of information, data protection and IT systems. In view of these changes, the overall risk level for the BMW Group has increased slightly compared to the previous year. Overall, there has been no significant change in the opportunities situation compared to the previous year. In addition to the risk categories described above, unforeseen events could have a negative impact on business operations and hence on the BMW Group’s results of operations, financial position and net assets, and on its reputation. A comprehensive risk management system is in place to ensure that the BMW Group successfully manages these risks. From today’s perspective, management does not see any threat to the BMW Group’s going-concern status. As in the previous year, identified risks are considered to be manageable, but could – like the opportunities – have an impact on the BMW Group’s forecasts if they were to materialise. The BMW Group’s financial position is stable and cash needs are currently covered by available liquidity and credit lines.