Automobile markets Worldwide registrations of passenger cars and light commercial vehicles grew by 3.3 % to 82.4 million units. The two largest automobile markets, the USA and China, were once again the mainstays driving this outcome. Registration figures in China, for instance, increased by 8.9 % to 20.5 million units. Although this number points to a weaker performance than one year earlier, the Chinese market nevertheless increased the gap between itself and the US market, which grew by 5.7 % to 17.5 million units. Automobile markets in Europe picked up where they had left off the previous year, growing by 9.2 % (14.2 million units) during the period under report. Excluding registrations in Germany, the European market fared slightly better with a 10.3 % increase to 11.0 million units. The German automobile market grew by 5.6 % to 3.2 million units and therefore accounted for nearly a quarter of all new registrations in Europe (22.6 %). France (1.9 million units; + 6.8 %) and Italy (1.6 million units; + 15.5 %) both saw robust growth, which also contributed to the recovery. Europe’s growth was also helped by a repeated dynamic performance in Spain (1.0 million units; + 20.9 %). Registrations in the United Kingdom were 6.3 % higher at 2.6 million units. Japan’s automobile market contracted in 2015, with new registrations falling and totalling only 4.9 million units ( – 9.8 %). Automobile markets in major emerging economies continued to suffer from recession in 2015. The Russian market shrank by more than one-third (1.5 million units; – 36.0 %) and the Brazilian market by a good quarter (2.5 million units; – 25.7 %). Research and development are absolutely essential for the BMW Group to maintain competitiveness as a premium manufacturer. As part of the Efficient Dynamics strategy, the Group works continually on additionally improving energy efficiency and reducing the emissions of the entire range of automobiles and motorcycles it sells. Under the catchword “Connected Drive”, the BMW Group works on the connectivity of driver, vehicle and the outside world. Both concepts embrace forwardlooking technologies in vehicles and are testimony to the BMW Group’s innovative strength. Going forward, the BMW Group will no doubt continue to set standards in the field of connectivity on the roads. At 31 December 2015, a total of 12,669 people at 13 locations in five countries worldwide were working in the BMW Group’s research and development network to achieve this end. Expenditure for research and development rose by 13.2 % to €5,169 million, mostly for projects aimed at securing the Group’s future (2014: €4,566 million). The research and development ratio stood at 5.6 % and therefore at a similar level to the previous year (2014: 5.7 %). The ratio of capitalised development costs to total research and development expenditure for the period (capitalisation ratio) was 39.9 % (2014: 32.8 %). Amortisation of capitalised development costs totalled €1,166 million (2014: €1,068 million; + 9.2 %). Further information on research and development expenditure is provided in the section “Report on Economic Position” (Results of Operations) and in note 10 to the Group Financial Statements. Given the pace of technological innovation, cooperation arrangements in the field of research and development are commonplace in the automotive industry. The BMW Group also enters into cooperation agreements with selected partners. The aim of these research and development activities, which may also include cross-sector input, is to help find innovative solutions for individual mobility. The focus is currently on next-generation technologies, such as digitalisation and alternative drive systems. Broadly diversified drive system research In the course of 2015, the Group integrated hybrid technologies in further BMW brand models. In parallel, engineers continued development work on highly-efficient combustion engines. In the medium and long term, the BMW Group is also developing a fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV). With these varying drive systems, the BMW Group is well prepared for the challenges of the future and will also be able to flexibly cater to both the requirements of customers and the standards dictated by RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT Development of credit loss ratio in % 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 11 12 13 14 15 0.49 0.48 0.46 0.50 0.37 39 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT legislators going forward. With efficient petrol- and diesel-driven engines, plug-in hybrid systems, batterypowered drives and also, in future, hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicles, the BMW Group is looking to provide suitable technologies for every segment and requirement. In a prototype presented in 2015, a direct water injection system was used for turbocharged petrol engines for the first time. This innovative technology greatly reduces the temperature in the combustion process, thereby raising the efficiency factor. Moreover, the technology reduces fuel consumption during higher performance requirements. The newly developed BMW 2 Series Active Tourer Plug-in Hybrid is fitted with a 3-cylinder front-wheel-drive petrol engine, a high-voltage generator installed at the front and an electric motor that transfers power to the rear wheels. The result is a road-linked all-wheel-drive system unique in its segment. The hydrogen fuel cell electric drive system is destined to become an integrated component of the Group’s Effi cient Dynamics strategy. The diversity of drive technologies that can be flexibly coordinated to suit varying vehicle concepts, customer requirements and statutory framework conditions on international markets is therefore growing. The hydrogen fuel cell electric drive system, which converts hydrogen to electricity and steam, enables locally emissions-free, electrically powered driving with the dynamic flair typical for the BMW brand, high suitability for covering long distances, and short refuelling times, therefore representing a further key option in the range of BMW eDrive technologies. The BMW Group has been conducting research and development work in the field of hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicles for over 15 years. Highly and fully automated driving Assistance systems increase both safety and convenience levels while driving, although the degree of driver support differs. Fully automated assistance systems offer the highest degree of automation. Fully automated functions are those which no longer need to be monitored by the driver. As with the fully automated Remote Valet Parking Assistant, the driver does not even need to be in the vehicle. Highly automated systems are the stage before fully automated systems and do not need to be constantly monitored by the driver. They control both the longitudinal (driving forwards and backwards) and latitudinal (driving to the left or right by steering) movements of the vehicle. By contrast, although semi-automated systems are capable of controlling both the longitudinal and latitudinal movements of the vehicle (e.g. congestion assistant), they need to be continually monitored by the driver. Assisted systems (such as ACC) on the other hand, only support the driver when driving forwards or steering left or right. At the Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas in 2015, the BMW Group presented a BMW i3 research vehicle that demonstrated how parking spaces can be found in a multi-storey car park with a fully automated, driverless vehicle. The advantages are less vehicle damage and far better use of the available parking space. Laser scanners installed on the vehicle create an exact picture of the surroundings. The Remote Valet Parking Assistant links this information with the digital floor plan of the car park and, based on this data, is capable of automatically driving the vehicle to a free space and parking it. When the driver wishes to leave again, he or she calls the vehicle (via smartwatch, for example) and it automatically drives to the car park exit, ready to continue to its next destination, without having to rely on a GPS signal. As the research vehicle is fitted not only with its own laser sensors but also with its own computers and the required algorithms, it can calculate its exact position in the car park, perfectly monitor its surroundings and independently navigate, fully automatically. Multi-storey car parks do not need to be elaborately equipped with special infrastructure. The new BMW 7 Series can already park straight in and out of a parking space via remote control. The fully automated Parking Assistant demonstrated in the prototype is a logical continuation of this innovative technological progress. At the CES, a further research vehicle was presented featuring a fully automated system that warns the driver in the event of an imminent collision and automatically triggers a braking manoeuvre precise to the last centimetre if required. Up to a certain speed, the test vehicle makes it practically impossible for the driver to collide with another obstacle. In order to achieve this feat, cameras, radar and laser sensors record the entire surroundings of the vehicle. Collision-free driving forms the basis for taking a crucial step towards achieving accident-free individual mobility and for that reason the BMW Group has been working for many years to implement this vision. Assistance systems such as Active Cruise Control with a stop-and-go feature (ACC) are already built into the latest BMW models and react to vehicles driving ahead. They are radar- and camera-based and apply the brakes, even until the vehicle comes to a halt if necessary. 40 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 29 Automotive Segment 35 Motorcycles Segment 36 Financial Services Segment 38 Research and Development 41 Purchasing 42 Sales and Marketing 44 Workforce 45 Sustainability 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets MINI presents Augmented Reality glasses The MINI Augmented Reality glasses presented at the Auto Shanghai 2015 supplement reality by superimposing the wearer’s field of vision with additional useful digital information on events in and around the vehicle, offering the user not only increased safety, but also greater convenience. Information relevant for driving, such as the current speed of the vehicle and the speed limit, are always displayed in the same position above the steering wheel, regardless of the driver’s head movements, ensuring that other road users or possible dangers are not hidden from view. Navigation arrows virtually projected onto the road assist the driver by ensuring that he or she continually concentrates on the surrounding traffic. If required, the glasses can also be adjusted to show places of interest or even free parking spaces en route. A camera installed on the side of the vehicle assists the driver when parking, enabling the driver to check both the obstacles in his or her line of vision and the distance to the kerb, which is displayed in their field of vision. The glasses also provide the driver with a virtual view through parts of the bodywork by making the A-pillar invisible, for instance, hence improving all-round vision. Innovations included in series vehicles In 2015, a new lighting technology known as organic light-emitting diodes, or OLEDs, were installed in a series model for the first time. OLEDs consume less electricity and therefore help further reduce CO2 emissions. Unlike the point-like light emitted by LEDs, OLEDs illuminate entire areas and are also smaller. The BMW Group has also installed numerous innovations for added driving convenience and assistance in the latest BMW 7 Series. For example, infotainment and communication features can be controlled from the back seat by means of a tablet. Self-configured or preconfigured functions can be controlled by hand gestures made within the vehicle. Using the new display key, the vehicle can be remotely and driverlessly manoeuvred in and out of tight parking spaces. Awards and prizes in 2015 The BMW Group won three “Golden Steering Wheels” during the year under report: for the BMW 7 Series in the luxury class, for the new BMW X1 among the mediumsized SUVs, and for the BMW 2 Series Gran Tourer in the family class, making BMW the most successful brand in this year’s Golden Steering Wheel competition. In the “International Engine of the Year Award”, the most prestigious engine competition worldwide, the BMW Group was winner in three different classes as well as overall winner. The new BMW TwinPower Turbo 3-cylinder petrol engine, which powers the BMW i8, was winner in its class. The complete drivetrain of the BMW i8 also won the “best new engine” award. The successful combination of electric motor and petrol engine also won the overall award. Winner in the 2.5- to 3.0-litre category was the M TwinPower Turbo in-line 6-cylinder petrol engine. The quadruple triumph for the BMW Group at the “International Engine of the Year Award” in 2015 additionally underscores the outstanding efficiency of the Efficient Dynamics technology package, which, since 2007, has enabled the BMW Group to continually increase the sheer driving pleasure and reduce consumption and emission levels at the same time. 41 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT Ideal balance between quality, innovation, flexibility and costs The underlying objective of the BMW Group’s purchasing, quality assurance and component production functions is to achieve the ideal balance between quality, innovation, flexible supply structures and competitive costs. At all levels – production materials, raw materials, services and capital goods – arrangements are in place to ensure that the BMW Group is able to react flexibly to fluctuations in demand, especially when operating within a volatile market environment. Increasing pace of globalisation Increased globalisation, the interconnected nature of supplier markets and the widespread expansion of BMW Group sales and production operations around the world mean that the distribution of purchase volumes is changing continuously. In the coming years, the NAFTA region in particular will be the focus of growth, given the increasing volume of production planned for the Spartanburg plant in the USA. The addition of the BMW Group’s new plant in San Luis Potosí, Mexico, which is scheduled to open in 2019, will reinforce this shift. The BMW Group remains committed to achieving globally balanced growth in terms of sales, production and purchase volumes. This strategy also makes an important contribution to natural currency hedging. Investments safeguard productivity and technology leadership The Purchasing and Supplier Network is also responsible for component production throughout the BMW PURCHASING AND SUPPLIER NETWORK Group. Investing in state-of-the-art manufacturing facilities and efficient structures increases the competitiveness of in-house component production. During the finan cial year under report, the cornerstone was laid for a new lightweight design centre at the BMW Group’s component production plant in Landshut. When completed, the centre will house facilities for some 160 engineers, who will research innovative materials, composite construction concepts and manufacturing processes for future vehicle generations. Fleet carbon emissions again reduced The development of sustainable products and services is an important aspect of the BMW Group’s business model. CO2 emissions levels are continually being reduced by incorporating Efficient Dynamics technologies in all of the Group’s vehicles. The scope of electrification within the fleet was further increased in 2015. These measures form the basis for complying with legally stipulated CO2 and fuel consumption limits moving forward. Between 1995 and 2015, the average amount of CO2 emitted by the Group’s three brands sold in Europe fell by 39.5 %. In 2015, the BMW Group’s fleet of new vehicles sold in Europe (EU-28) consumed an average of 4.7 litres of diesel per 100 km and 5.7 litres of petrol respectively. CO2 emissions averaged 127 grams per km. Clean production The efficient use of resources is an important aspect of running the business on a sustainable basis. When applied to all production-related processes, resource efficiency helps protect the environment and minimise costs. Since 2006, the consumption of resources and emissions per vehicle produced has been reduced by an average of 48.1 %. The individual figures are as follows: water consumption was slightly higher than one year earlier, largely due to increased cooling requirements caused by the hot summer in Germany (2014: 2.18 m³; + 2.8 %). At 0.45 m³, the volume of process wastewater per vehicle produced fell by 4.3 % (2014: 0.47 m³). The volume of non-recyclable production waste was further reduced to 4.00 kg per vehicle produced in 2015 (2014: 4.93 kg; – 18.9 %). Solvent emissions were successfully curtailed by 5.4 % to 1.22 kg per vehicle produced during 2015 (2014: 1.29 kg). Sustainability along the entire value-added chain Sustainability criteria are not only a vital aspect of inhouse production, they also play a major role in the selection and assessment of suppliers as well as in the field of transport logistics. The active management of sustainability risks along the supply chain mitigates compliance and image risks. With this in mind, the BMW Group has integrated a comprehensive system of sustainability management in its purchasing processes. The amount of energy required for transportation worldwide has continued to rise sharply in recent years. In order to keep CO2 emissions to an absolute minimum, the principle “production follows the market” is applied. In addition, the proportion of CO2-efficient modes of transport is being increased continually. In the year under report, for instance, the proportion of goods transported by air freight was significantly reduced. At 63.1 %, the proportion of new vehicles leaving BMW Group plants by rail was maintained at a high level (2014: 63.3 %). Competitive thanks to sustainable human resources policies In 2015, the BMW Group reinforced its position as one of the most attractive employers in the world. The prominent role played in the field of sustainability helps employees identify with the business and its products. This strong sense of identification is one of the factors contributing to the low attrition rate within the BMW Group, in turn helping to keep personnel recruitment expenses on the low side. Social engagement The BMW Group expended a total of €39.1 million (2014: €34.5 million) for social engagement in 2015, including €17.1 million (2014: €10.2 million) in the form of donations. The sharp increase in overall expenditure for social engagement compared to 2014 mainly reflects 48 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 29 Automotive Segment 35 Motorcycles Segment 36 Financial Services Segment 38 Research and Development 41 Purchasing 42 Sales and Marketing 44 Workforce 45 Sustainability 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets larger donations to the BMW Foundation Herbert Quandt and to the Eberhard von Kuenheim Foundation. Further information on the subject of sustainability within the BMW Group and the main topics is provided in the Sustainability Report, which can be accessed online at http:/ /www.bmwgroup.com. The Sustainable Value Report 2015 was drawn up in accordance with the Guidelines of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI G4), the most commonly used set of guidelines for sustainability reporting. The Sustainable Value Report 2015 is drawn up in accordance with the “comprehensive option” and is published at the same time as the Annual Report 2015. Political and global economic risks and opportunities As one of the world’s leading providers of premium products and services, the BMW Group faces a variety of major challenges. The world is changing at great speed and the resulting situations can give rise to risks on the one hand and opportunities on the other. Political and global economic risks Efficient individual mobility remains a key issue in many countries, in terms of the political regulation of both national environmental and industrial policymaking. Changing values in society call for innovative mobility and service solutions. The potential effect of unforeseeable disturbances in global economic interdependencies, increasingly fierce competition among established manufacturers and the emergence of new competitors is extremely difficult to predict. Shifts between volatile and stable economic phases, combined with the ready availability of information, also contribute to the uncertainty experienced by both markets and consumers. Although the US and UK economies may currently appear to be robust, the underlying macroeconomic risks – such as misallocations between asset price classes – have not become any less real compared to the previous year. The transition of the Chinese economy from an investment-driven to a consumerdriven market will entail slower growth rates and greater instability on financial markets. Apart from precipitating a decline in automobile sales, this process may also result in lower demand for commodities, which is most likely to hurt mainly emerging economies such as Brazil or Russia. A further drop in commodities prices could result in political and economic upheavals and hence lead to lower aggregate demand from the countries affected. The threat of distortions on the Chinese property, stock and banking markets on the one hand and/or an overly rapid hike in interest rates by the US Federal Bank pose considerable risks for global financial market stability. Unsolved structural problems in the eurozone or a renewed deterioration in the economic climate, for instance in Greece, could potentially dampen growth prospects for the BMW Group. At a political level, the current refugee crisis poses a threat to European integration and hopes of further expanding or at least maintaining a single economic and monetary area. Increasing political unrest, military conflicts, terrorist activities, natural disasters and/or pandemics could have a lasting negative impact on the global economy and international capital markets. The risks referred to above could curtail purchasing power in the countries and regions involved and, among other things, lead to reduced demand for the products and services offered by the BMW Group. The Group counters these risks primarily by internationalising its sales and production structures, in order to minimise the extent to which earnings are dependent on the outcomes of risks in individual countries and regions. The regular monitoring of macroeconomic data, which serve as the basis for sales volume and production planning, ensures that market changes are identified at an early stage. The extent of political and global economic risks is determined by analysing historical data and applying a cash-flow-atrisk approach. If risks from this category were to materialise, they could – due to sales volume fluctuations – have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. Overall, the risk amounts attached to political and global economic risks are classified as high. Political and global economic opportunities Economic conditions influence the operations, financial position and results of operations of the BMW Group. Should the global economy develop significantly better than reflected in the outlook, the revenues and earnings of the BMW Group could be significantly higher than originally predicted. A better-than-expected performance of the global economy with stronger growth in China, the introduction of economic stimulus programmes, the implementation of structural reforms within the eurozone and robust consumer spending in the USA could – despite higher financing costs – result in significantly stronger sales volume growth, reduced competitive pressure and the possibility of achieving better selling prices. Economic opportunities present themselves for the BMW Group through the focused identification of, and engagement in, growth markets. Any political and/or global economic opportunities capable of having a positive sustainable impact on earnings are currently classified by the BMW Group as insignificant. Strategic and sector risks and opportunities New regulations and rising fuel and energy prices can also influence customer behaviour. Medium- and long-term targets have already been put in place in Europe, North America, Japan, China and other countries to minimise both fuel consumption and carbon emissions. 72 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 18 Business Model 20 Management System 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 63 Outlook 68 Report on Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets Risks arising from the tightening of laws and regulations One of the greatest risks for the automobile industry is the possible threat of short-term tightening of laws and regulations, as they could give rise to significantly higher levels of investment and ongoing expenses, and perhaps more importantly, result in changes in customer behaviour. The potential tightening of consumer protection laws could also result in a greater number of recalls. In some cases, changes in customer behaviour are not only brought on by new regulations, but also through changes in public opinion, values, environmental issues and fuel/energy prices. There is a clear move towards increasingly stringent vehicle emissions regulations, particularly for conventional drive systems, not only in the developed markets of Europe and North America, but also in emerging markets such as China. The BMW Group counters this risk with its Efficient Dynamics technology and continues to play a pioneering role in the premium segment by continually reducing both fuel consumption and emissions. Since 2013, electric drive systems built into BMW i vehicles have increasingly broadened the mix on offer, thus bolstering the BMW Group’s efforts to comply with statutory carbon emissions regulations and requirements. The BMW Group is investing in the development of sustainable drive technologies and materials, with the aim of providing highly efficient vehicles for individual mobility in the premium segment, both now and in the future. Further significant risks could be triggered by the tightening of existing import and export regulations, resulting primarily in additional expenses, but also in restrictions in the import and export of vehicles and/or parts. Changes in the legal business environment are monitored and assessed regularly by the relevant centralised departments, thus ensuring that the BMW Group always complies with statutory requirements. The impact of legislation that has either been enacted or is likely to be enacted is taken into account in the outlook. Employees make a vital contribution to sustainable growth and improved profitability through their innovative skills. One prerequisite in this regard is a consistent strategic approach to the management of human resources, even in the event of changes in the legal framework. The BMW Group has put appropriate measures in place for such eventualities. Risk amounts and earnings impact in this category are measured on the basis of extensive scenario analyses. If strategic and sector category risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the twoyear assessment period. The amounts of risk attached to strategic and sector-specific risks are classified as high. Strategic and sector opportunities Additions to the product and mobility portfolio and expansion in growth regions are seen as the most important opportunities for growth in the medium to long term. Remaining on growth course depends above all on the ability to develop innovative products and bring them to market. The introduction of the BMW i brand opens up new customer target groups for the Group and consolidates the position of BMW as a sustainable, forwardlooking brand. BMW i products can be seen as “empowerment projects” for new technologies and processes, which may also benefit other vehicle concepts. The existing product portfolio has been expanded to include mobility services such as DriveNow, ChargeNow and ParkNow. In 2015, the BMW Group entered new segments with the BMW 2 Series Active Tourer and the 2 Series Gran Tourer. The market acceptance and sales volumes of product innovations that are either planned for the future or have recently been launched could turn out to be greater than predicted in the outlook. In the short term, however, any potentially positive impact is classified as insignificant. The long-term trend towards greater sustainability provides opportunities to boost sales of sustainable products and, under the right circumstances, achieve better selling prices. Innovations such as the BMW i3 and i8 in the field of electric mobility or Efficient Dynamics across the entire product portfolio provide excellent platforms for future growth. Potential also exists in engaging in new product and market categories and developing new customer target groups. New business models and cooperation arrangements with the BMW Group’s growing network of business partners often provide the best means to exploit these opportunities. Good examples are the implementation of the 360° ELECTRIC portfolio in the field of electric mobility, the partnership with Sixt in the field of mobility services, and collaboration with Toyota on developing a hydrogen fuel cell system. The BMW Group is constantly refining the tools it uses to recruit staff, encourage career development and retain employees within the Group. This environment offers people the ideal situation in which to develop their skills. If these measures generate greater benefits than currently expected, the BMW Group’s revenues, results of operations and cash flows can be positively impacted 73 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT and forecasted figures surpassed. Creating a successful performance culture and developing the expertise and skill sets of both staff and managers alike throughout the organisation can also have a positive impact on both revenue and profitability. The BMW Group’s earnings can be positively affected in the short to medium term by changes in the legal environment. A possible reduction in tariff barriers, import restrictions or direct excise duties could lower the cost of materials for the BMW Group, also enabling products and services to be offered to customers at lower prices. Overall, strategic and sector opportunities capable of having a positive and sustainable impact on earnings are currently classified by the BMW Group as insignificant. Risks and opportunities relating to operations Production- and technology-related risks Production stoppages and downtimes – in particular due to fire, but also to manufacturing and control equipment breakdowns or transportation and logistical disruptions – pose risks against which the BMW Group has put suitable measures in place. From the outset, production structures and processes are designed with a view to minimising any potential damage and its probability of occurrence. The broad array of measures taken includes technical fire protection solutions, land development measures including contingencies against flooding, preventative maintenance, spare parts management on a multi-site basis, and backup plans for alternative transportation. The level of risk is also reduced by the deployment of flexible work-schedule models and employee time accounts, but also by the ability to develop individual models at additional sites if necessary, thus enabling any backlog arising from production interruptions to be clawed back within a short time. Moreover, risks arising from business interruption and loss of production due to fire are also insured up to economically reasonable levels with underwriters of good credit standing. The development and production of technologically complex vehicles in high volumes is technically challenging and a source of potential quality risks. In order to achieve the outstanding level of quality expected of the BMW Group’s products and minimise both statutory and non-statutory warranty costs, it may possibly be necessary to incur a higher level of expenditure than originally forecast. There is also a risk of limited availability of products, particularly around the time of new vehicle production start-ups. These risks are mitigated through quality assurance activities in the form of regular audits and the continual improvement of quality management systems. The BMW Group also recognises appropriate provisions for both statutory and nonstatutory warranty obligations. These provisions reduce the risk to the BMW Group’s earnings, a fact already taken into account in the forecast. Further information on risks in conjunction with provisions for statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations is provided in note 36 of the Group Financial Statements. If risks from the production- and technology-related risks category were to materialise, they could have a high negative earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to productionand technology-related issues is classified as medium. Production- and technology-related opportunities Opportunities could arise as a result of product- or process-related technological innovations, or from organisational changes designed to improve efficiency or increase competitiveness. In the field of lightweight construction, for example, carbon is being utilised in high volumes for the first time in the automobile industry in the construction of the BMW i3. During the year under report, the BMW Group went one step further by introducing the use of carbon in the BMW 7 Series, thereby generating competitive benefits in the form of lower fuel consumption and better driving dynamics through reduced vehicle weight. Given the long lead times involved in developing new products and processes, the BMW Group does not expect these opportunities to have a material impact on earnings during the forecast period. Purchasing risks Close cooperation between carmakers and automotive suppliers in the development and production of vehicles and the provision of services generates economic benefits, but also raises levels of dependency. The increasing trend towards modular-based production with a set of common architectures covering various models and product lines exacerbates the consequences of the loss of an individual supplier or failure to supply on time. As part of the supplier preselection process, the BMW Group is careful to ensure that its future business partners meet the same high ecological, social and corporate governance standards by which the BMW Group itself expects to be measured. The BMW Group Sustainability Standard, which contains a set of fundamental principles and standards covering both production and 74 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 18 Business Model 20 Management System 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 63 Outlook 68 Report on Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets non-production aspects relevant for bought-in goods and services, serves as the basis for the supplier network, including the requirement to comply with internationally recognised human rights and applicable labour and social standards. The principal tool for ensuring compliance with the BMW Group Sustainability Standard is a three-stage sustainability and risk management approach comprising a BMW Group-specific sustainability risk filter, a sustainability questionnaire and a sustainability audit. In addition, the technical and finan cial capabilities of suppliers – especially those supplying for modular-based production – are continuously monitored during both the development and the production phases of the Group’s vehicles. Particular attention is paid to the quality of parts. In order to attain the level of quality required, it may become necessary to invest in new technological concepts or discontinue planned innovations, with the consequence that the cost of materials could exceed levels incorporated in the forecast. Supplier sites are assessed for exposure to natural hazards, such as floods or earthquakes, in order to identify supply risks at an early stage and implement appropriate countermeasures. Fire risks at series suppliers are evaluated by means of questionnaires and selective site inspections. Raw materials management procedures are in place to mitigate the risk of a production interruption due to shortages of supplies of critical raw materials. In order to reduce supply risks, the BMW Group works hard to minimise the input of raw materials or to use alternative raw materials as a substitute. The increasingly complex nature of the supplier network, especially at the level of sub-suppliers, whose operations can only be indirectly influenced by the BMW Group, is a further potential cause of downtimes at supplier locations. Production problems incurred by suppliers could have adverse consequences for the BMW Group, ranging from increased expenditure to production interruptions and a corresponding reduction in sales volume. If purchasing risks were to materialise, they could have a high negative earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to supply risk is classified as medium. Purchasing opportunities Global sourcing is seen as a key area for generating opportunities within the Purchasing and Supplier Network, whereby the BMW Group benefits from efficiency improvements and access to innovative solutions developed by suppliers, in some cases leading to a broader range of products. By observing and playing a proactive role in developing global supplier markets, the BMW Group continuously strives to increase its competitiveness by working together with the best providers in the global marketplace for products and services. Opportunities arise particularly in conjunction with the introduction of new and innovative production technologies and by capitalising on favourable location-specific cost factors that present themselves when local supplier structures are developed nearby new and existing BMW Group production plants. The integration of previously unidentified innovations from the supplier market in the product range is a further source of opportunities. Innovative suppliers are offered a variety of options when drawing up contracts, in order to make it more attractive for those developing innovative solutions. At regular intervals, the BMW Group honours its most inventive supplier entities with the Supplier Innovation Award. The BMW Group does not expect these opportunities to have a material earnings impact over the two-year assessment period when compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Risks relating to sales and marketing Changes in global economic conditions and increasingly protectionist trends are among the factors that could result in lower demand as well as fluctuations in the regional spread and composition of sales in terms of vehicles and mobility services. Risks relating to these developments can be reduced with the aid of flexible selling and production processes. At the same time, increased pressure on selling prices and margins caused by intense competition on the world’s markets, particularly in western Europe, the USA and China, requires constant analysis, including keeping an eye on developments in grey market volumes from the USA to China. Selling price and margin risks are measured using a scenario approach, based on a bottom-up survey of the key sales markets and an analysis of historical data. If sales and marketing risks were to materialise, they could have a high negative earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to sales and marketing risks is classified as high. 75 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT Opportunities relating to sales and marketing The BMW Group focuses its selling capacities primarily on markets with the greatest sales volume and revenue potential and fastest growth rates. Developments in the field of digital communication and connectivity are also opening up opportunities for marketing the BMW Group’s various brands. Consumers can meanwhile be reached on a more targeted and individual basis, thus helping to strengthen long-term relationships and brand loyalty. Investment in both existing and new marketing concepts is firmly aimed at intensifying relationships with customers. A new online sales platform was introduced in Great Britain, for example, which enables customers to select, finance and buy their vehicles online. There will be no relaxing of efforts in the active search for new opportunities to create even greater added value for customers than currently expected, whilst at the same time looking for ways to boost sales volumes and achieve better selling prices. The BMW Group keeps track of the latest developments and trends in communication technology, including the use of social media and networks, in order to extend customer reach for its brands. The automotive-related business activities of technology companies are also closely followed (e.g. automated driving). The BMW Group’s brands are present on numerous platforms, such as Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. Digital communication can result in a more intense product and brand experience for customers, which could, in turn, have a positive impact on revenues and earnings. The BMW Group considers that these opportunities will not have a material earnings impact over the two-year assessment period compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Risks and opportunities relating to pension obligations The BMW Group’s pension obligations to its employees resulting from defined benefit plans are measured on the basis of actuarial reports. Future pension payments are discounted by reference to market yields on highquality corporate bonds. These yields are subject to market fluctuation and therefore influence the level of pension obligations. Changes in other parameters, such as rises in inflation and longer life expectancy, also impact pension obligations and payments. Opportunities and risks arise depending on the nature and scale of changes in these parameters. Most of the BMW Group’s pension obligations are managed in external pension funds or trust arrangements and the related assets are kept separate from those of the Group. The amount of funds required to finance pension payments out of operations in the future is therefore substantially reduced, since most of the Group’s pension obligations are settled out of pension fund assets. The pension assets of the BMW Group comprise interest-bearing securities, equities, real estate and other investment classes. Assets held by pension funds and trust arrangements are monitored continuously and managed on a risk-and-yield basis. A broad spread of investments also helps to mitigate risk. In order to reduce fluctuations in pension funding shortfalls, investments are structured to coincide with the timing of pension payments and the expected pattern of pension obligations. Remeasurements on the obligations and fund asset sides are recognised, net of deferred taxes, in “Other comprehensive income” and hence directly in equity (within revenue reserves). If risks relating to pension obligations were to materialise, they could have a high negative earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk relating to pension obligations is classified as high. Within a favourable capital market environment, the return generated by pension assets may exceed expectations and reduce the deficit of the relevant pension plans. This, in turn, could have a materially favourable impact on the net assets position and earnings performance of the BMW Group. Further information on risks in conjunction with pension provisions is provided in note 35 of the Group Financial Statements. Risks and opportunities relating to information, data protection and IT systems Information technology (IT) is used to an increasing extent in every aspect of the business. In this context, the significance of electronically processed data and the availability of IT systems is constantly growing. These developments create opportunities on the one hand, whilst also posing a source of risk on the other. Information, data protection and IT risks The BMW Group could incur damage if the confidentiality or integrity of sensitive information, data and systems were to be compromised and/or availability restricted. One of the direct consequences of such an eventuality would be additional expense incurred to recover data and restore systems. Such eventualities could 76 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 18 Business Model 20 Management System 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 63 Outlook 68 Report on Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets also possibly have a negative impact on operating performance due to the non-availability of products and services or even downtimes in the production of spare parts and/or vehicles. Indirectly, the BMW Group could also be exposed to unquantifiable reputational risks. Risk management procedures include the systematic documentation of all informational and IT risks, regular monitoring, and the implementation of appropriate measures by the departments responsible. Technical data protection procedures include virus scanners, firewall systems, access authorisation controls at both operating system and application level, regular data backups and data encryption. Regular analyses and controls (for example the testing of data protection requirements) and rigorous security management ensure a high level of security. The demands placed on IT facilities, both externally and internally, are changing at a breathtaking pace in the face of technological developments. Potential risks are therefore investigated continuously and appropriate measures put in place in order to either prevent them or minimise their impact. Despite regular testing and the whole gamut of preventative security measures employed, it is nevertheless impossible to rule out risks completely in this area. Great emphasis is placed on protecting both business information and employee and customer data from unauthorised access and/or misuse. Data security based on International Security Standard ISO/IEC 27001 is an integral component in all business processes. Personal data is protected in accordance with the stringent requirements of the EU Data Protection Directive and the Federal Data Protection Act (Bundes daten schutzgesetz – BDSG). All employees are required to treat confidential information (such as customer and employee data) in an appropriate manner, ensure that information systems are properly used and that risks are handled with the utmost transparency. Uniform requirements, documented in a coordinated and comprehensive set of principles, guidelines and work instructions, are applicable groupwide. Regular communication and awareness-raising activities create a high degree of security and risk consciousness among the employees involved. Employees receive training to ensure compliance with the applicable requirements and in-house rules. Responsibility for data protection in each Group entity lies with the Board of Management (of BMWAG) or the relevant company management team. Local Data Privacy Protection Officers are embedded in each of the Group’s entities. In the case of cooperation arrangements and business partner relationships, the BMW Group protects its intellectual property as well as customer and employee data by stipulating clear instructions with regard to data protection and the use of information technology. Information pertaining to key areas of expertise as well as sensitive personal data are subject to particularly stringent security measures. In a clear signal to employees, customers and Europe’s data protection authorities that data protection is taken very seriously, the Board of Management of BMWAG has resolved a set of Binding Corporate Rules governing the handling of employee data. If information, data protection and IT risks were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The levels of risk attached to information, data protection and IT risks are classified as medium. Information, data protection and IT opportunities Conversely, the deployment of information technology also opens up a great many opportunities for the BMW Group. New approaches to production and energy supply systems currently being investigated in the context of the Industrial Internet (“Industrie 4.0”) are generating significant efficiency improvements and resulting in greater sustainability. The range of services and apps on offer to customers via Connected Drive is constantly being expanded and updated. The BMW 7 Series offers the comfort of partially automated driving functions with the optional Driving Assistant Plus feature. The purchase of a stake in HERE mapping service was an important step for the next generation of mobility and location-based services. For the automobile sector, it serves as the basis for a variety of new customer-oriented functions, ranging from innovative assistance systems through to fully automated driving. The BMW Group does not expect these opportunities to have a material earnings impact over the two-year 77 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT assessment period compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Financial risks and risks relating to the use of financial instruments Currency risks and opportunities As an internationally operating enterprise, the BMW Group conducts business in a variety of currencies, thus giving rise to currency risks and opportunities. Since a substantial portion of Group revenues is generated outside the eurozone (particularly in China and the USA) and the procurement of production material and funding is also organised on a worldwide basis, fluctuations in exchange rates can play a significant role for Group earnings. Cash-flow-at-risk models and scenario analyses are used to measure currency risks and opportunities. Operational currency management is based on the results provided by these tools. In 2015 the Chinese renminbi, the US dollar, the British pound, the Russian rouble and the Japanese yen constituted approximately 70 % of the total foreign currency exposure of the BMW Group. The BMW Group manages currency risks at both strategic (medium and long term) and operating levels (short and medium term). Medium- and long-term measures include increasing production volumes in non-euro-region countries (natural hedging) and increasing purchase volumes denominated in foreign currencies. Constructing new plants in countries such as the USA, China or Brazil has also helped reduce foreign currency exposures. Currency risks are managed in the short to medium term and for operational purposes by means of hedging. Hedging transactions are entered into only with financial partners of good credit standing. Opportunities are also secured through the deployment of options. Counterparty risk management procedures are carried out continuously in order to monitor the creditworthiness of business partners. If currency risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. A high level of risk is attached to currency risks. Significant opportunities can arise if currency developments are favourable for the BMW Group. Risks and opportunities relating to raw materials Changes in prices of raw materials are monitored on the basis of a set of well-defined management procedures. The principal objective of these management processes is to increase planning reliability for the BMW Group. Price risks and opportunities relating to precious metals (platinum, palladium, rhodium) and non-ferrous metals (aluminium, copper, lead) and, to some extent, to steel and steel ingredients (iron ore, coke/coal) and energy (gas, electricity) are hedged using financial derivatives and/or supply contracts with fixed pricing arrangements. If risks relating to raw materials were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. A high level of risk is attached to risks relating to raw materials. Conversely, significant opportunities can arise if prices of raw materials develop favourably for the BMW Group. Liquidity risks Based on experience gained during the financial crisis, a minimum liquidity concept has been developed and is rigorously adhered to. Solvency is assured at all times throughout the BMW Group by maintaining a liquidity reserve and by the broad diversification of refinancing sources. The liquidity position is monitored continuously at a separate entity level and managed by means of a cash flow requirements and sourcing forecast system in place throughout the Group. Liquidity risks may be reflected in rising refinancing costs. They may also manifest themselves in restricted access to funds as a consequence of the general market situation or the default of individual banks. The major part of the Financial Services segment’s credit financing and lease business is refinanced on capital markets. Thanks to its excellent creditworthiness, the BMW Group has good access to financial markets and, as in previous years, was able to raise funds at good conditions during the year under report, reflecting a diversified refinancing strategy and the solid liquidity and earnings base of the BMW Group. Internationally recognised rating agencies have additionally confirmed the BMW Group’s strong creditworthiness. If liquidity risks were to materialise, they could have a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk of incurring liquidity risk is classified as low – including the risk of the BMW Group’s rating 78 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 18 Business Model 20 Management System 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 63 Outlook 68 Report on Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets being downgraded and any ensuing deterioration in financing conditions. A description of the methods applied for risk measurement and hedging in conjunction with currency and commodity risks is provided in note 42 of the Group Finan cial Statements. If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group as hedges are accounted for as hedging relationships. Further information on risks in conjunction with financial instruments is provided in note 42 to the Group Financial Statements. Risks and opportunities relating to the Financial Services segment The categories of risk relating to the provision of financial services are credit and counterparty risk, residual value risk, interest rate risk, liquidity risk and operational risk. In order to identify, measure, manage and monitor these risks, a variety of internal methods has been developed based on regulatory environment requirements (such as Basel III) and which comply with both national and international standards. The adopted risk strategy, in combination with a set of strategic principles and rules derived from regulatory requirements, serve as the basis for risk management within the Financial Services segment. At the heart of the risk management process is a clear division between front- and back-office activities and a comprehensive internal control system. The key risk management tool employed within the Financial Services segment is aimed at ensuring that the Group’s risk-bearing capacity is not exceeded. In this context, all risks (defined as “unexpected losses”) must be covered at all times by an appropriate asset cushion in the form of equity capital. Unexpected losses are measured using a variety of value-at-risk techniques that have been developed for each risk category. The appropriateness of these techniques is tested at regular intervals. Risks are aggregated after taking account of correlation effects. The total amount of risks calculated in this way is then compared with the so-called “risk coverage amount”, i.e. the resources allocated to cover risks. The risk coverage amount is determined on the basis of the Financial Services segment’s willingness to take risks. The segment’s risk-bearing capacity is monitored continuously with the aid of an integrated limit system that also differentiates between the various risk categories. The segment’s total risk exposure was covered at all times during the past year by the available riskcoverage volumes. Credit and counterparty risks and opportunities Credit and counterparty default risk arises within the Financial Services segment if a contractual partner (i.e. a customer or dealer) either becomes unable or only partially able to fulfil its contractual obligations, such that either lower income is generated or losses are incurred. The Financial Services segment uses a variety of rating systems in order to assess the creditworthiness of its contractual partners. Credit risks are managed at the time of the initial credit decision on the basis of a calculation of the present value of standard risk costs and subsequently, during the term of the credit, by using a range of risk provisioning techniques to cover risks emanating from changes in customer creditworthiness. In this context, individual customers are classified by category each month on the basis of their current contractual status, and appropriate levels of allowance recognised in accordance with that classification. If economies develop more favourably than assumed in the outlook, there is a chance that credit losses may be reduced and earnings improved accordingly. If credit and counterparty risks were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the twoyear assessment period. The level of risk attached to credit and counterparty risks is classified as high. The BMW Group classifies potential opportunities in this area as significant. Residual value risks and opportunities Risks and opportunities arise in conjunction with lease contracts if the market value of a leased vehicle at the end of the contractual term of a lease differs from the residual value estimated at the inception of the lease and factored into the lease payments. A residual value risk exists if the expected market value of the vehicle at the end of the contractual term is lower than its estimated residual value at the date the contract is entered into. Each vehicle’s estimated residual value is calculated on the basis of historical external and internal data and used to predict the expected market value of the vehicle at the end of the contractual period. As part of the process of managing residual value risks, a calculation is performed at the inception of each contract to determine the net present value of risk costs. Market developments are observed throughout the contractual period and the risk assessment updated appropriately. 79 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT If residual value risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. A medium earnings impact would then arise for the segments affected (Financial Services and Automotive). The level of risk is classified as high for the Group as a whole. The BMW Group classifies potential residual value opportunities as significant. Interest rate risks and opportunities Interest rate risks in the Financial Services segment relate to potential losses caused by changes in market interest rates and can arise when fixed interest rate periods for assets and liabilities recognised in the balance sheet do not match. Interest rate risks in the Financial Services line of business are managed by raising refinancing funds with matching maturities and by employing interest rate derivatives. If risks relating to interest rate risks were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to interest rate risks is classified as high. Interest rate developments that are positive compared to the forecast constitute interest rate opportunities which the BMW Group classifies as significant. If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group are accounted for as hedging relationships. Further information on risks in conjunction with financial instruments is provided in note 42 to the Group Financial Statements. Liquidity and operational risks in the Financial Services segment Use of the “matched funding principle” to finance the Financial Services segment’s operations eliminates liquidity risks to a large extent. Regular measurement and monitoring ensure that cash inflows and outflows from transactions in varying maturity cycles and currencies offset each other. The relevant procedures are incorporated in the BMW Group’s target liquidity concept. Operational risks are defined in the Financial Services segment as the risk of losses arising as a consequence of the inappropriateness or failure of internal procedures (process risks), people (personnel-related risks), systems (infrastructure and IT risks) and external events (external risks). These four categories of risk also include related legal and reputational risks. The comprehensive recording and measurement of risk scenarios, loss events and countermeasures in the Operational Risk Management Suite (OpRisk-Suite) provides the basis for a systematic analysis and management of potential and/or actual operational risks. Annual self-assessments are also carried out. If operational risks were to materialise, they could have a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to operational risks is classified as medium. Legal risks Compliance with the law is a basic prerequisite for the success of the BMW Group. Current law provides the binding framework for the BMW Group’s various business activities around the world. The growing international scale of the BMW Group’s operations, the complexity of the business world and the whole gamut of complex legal regulations increase the risk of laws not being adhered to, simply because they are either not known or not fully understood. The BMW Group has established a Compliance Organisation aimed at ensuring that its representative bodies, managers and staff act in a lawful manner at all times. Further information on the BMW Group’s Compliance Organisation can be found in the section “Corporate Governance”. Like all internationally operating enterprises, the BMW Group is confronted with legal disputes relating, in particular, to warranty claims, product liability, infringements of protected rights and proceedings initiated by government agencies. Any of these matters could, among other outcomes, have an adverse impact on the Group’s reputation. Such proceedings are typical for the sector and can arise as a consequence of realigning product or purchasing strategies to suit changed market conditions. Particularly in the US market, class action lawsuits and product liability risks can have substantial financial consequences and cause damage to the Group’s public image. The high quality of the Group’s products, which is ensured by regular quality audits and ongoing improvement measures, helps reduce this risk. The BMW Group recognises appropriate levels of provision for lawsuits. A part of these risks, particularly regarding the US market, is insured where this makes 80 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 18 Business Model 20 Management System 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 63 Outlook 68 Report on Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets business sense. The application of more rigorous consumer regulations or the stricter interpretation of existing regulations could result in a greater number of recalls. Some risks, however, either cannot be estimated or only to a limited extent. In other cases, the incurrence of expenses or losses may only be considered possible, but not probable. Such items are reported as contingent liabilities. It cannot be ruled out, however, that losses from damages could arise that are either not covered or not fully covered by insurance policies or provisions, or which are only reported as contingent liabilities. In accordance with IAS 37 (Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets), the required information is not provided if the BMW Group concludes that disclosure of the information could seriously prejudice the outcome of the relevant legal proceedings. Further information on contingent liabilities is provided in note 41 to the Group Financial Statements. If legal risks were to materialise, they could have a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to legal risks is classified as low. However, it cannot be ruled out that new legal risks, as yet unidentified, could materialise that could have a high impact on the BMW Group’s results of operations and financial condition. Overall assessment of the risk and opportunities situation The overall risk assessment is based on a consolidated view of all significant individual risks and opportunities. In terms of strategic and sector-specific risks, the BMW Group has identified a higher level of risk, particularly in connection with the trend towards stricter statutory regulations. Operational risks on the purchasing side are decreasing, thanks to the successful implementation of cost-cutting measures. The level of risk attached to the category “Risks relating to the Financial Services segment” has increased as a result of the growing size of the portfolio. In view of these changes, the overall risk situation for the BMW Group has increased compared to the previous year. In addition to the risk categories described above, unforeseeable events could possibly have a negative impact on the BMW Group’s results of operations, financial position and net assets, as well as on its reputation. A comprehensive risk management system is in place to ensure that the BMW Group successfully manages risks to the greatest extent possible. In addition, the opportunities described above could potentially help the BMW Group to achieve its targets and forecasts. From today’s perspective, management does not see any threat to the BMW Group’s going-concern status. As in the previous year, identified risks are considered to be manageable, but could – just like opportunities – have an impact on the BMW Group’s forecasts if they were to materialise. The BMW Group’s liquidity is stable and all cash requirements are currently covered by available funds and accessible credit lines. 81 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT The internal control system in place throughout the BMW Group is aimed at ensuring the effectiveness of operations. It makes an important contribution towards ensuring compliance with the laws that apply to the BMW Group as well as providing assurance on the propriety and reliability of internal and external financial reporting. The internal control system is therefore a significant factor in the management of process risks. The principal features of the internal control system and the risk management system, as far as they relate to individual entity and Group financial reporting processes, are described below. Information and communication One component of the internal control system is that of “Information and Communication”. It ensures that all the information needed to achieve the objectives set for the internal control system is made available to those responsible in an appropriate and timely manner. Information relevant for the various financial reporting processes – at BMWAG, other consolidated Group entities and for the BMW Group as a whole – is set out primarily in organisational manuals, internal and external financial reporting guidelines, accounting manuals and training documentation. This information, which can be accessed at all levels via the BMW Group’s intranet system, provide the framework for ensuring that the relevant rules are applied consistently throughout the Group. The quality and relevance of these instructions are ensured by regular review as well as by continuous communication between the relevant departments. Organisational measures All financial reporting processes (including Group financial reporting processes) are structured in organisational terms in accordance with the principle of segregation of duties, thus making an important contribution to the early identification of errors and the prevention of potential wrongdoing. Regular comparison of internal forecasts and external financial reports, for example, improves the quality of financial reporting. Moreover, the internal audit department, in its capacity as a process-independent function, tests and assesses the effectiveness of the internal control system and proposes improvements where appropriate. Controls Extensive controls are carried out by managers and staff in all financial reporting processes at an individual entity and Group level, thus ensuring that legal requirements and internal guidelines are complied with and that all business transactions are properly executed. Controls are also carried out with the aid of IT applications, thus reducing the incidence of process risks. Moreover, the performance of controls on accounts deemed to be exposed to risk are subject to additional monitoring. IT authorisations All IT applications used in financial reporting processes throughout the BMW Group are subject to access restrictions, allowing only authorised persons to gain access to systems and data in a controlled environment. Access authorisations are allocated on the basis of the nature of the duties to be performed. In addition, IT processes are designed and authorisations allocated using the dual control principle, as a result of which, for instance, requests cannot be submitted and approved by the same person. Technical monitoring procedures are also in place to ensure appropriate authorisation security throughout all IT systems. Internal control training for employees All employees are appropriately trained to carry out their duties and kept informed of any changes in regulations or processes that affect them. Managers and staff also have access to detailed best-practice descriptions relating to risks and controls in the various processes, thus increasing risk awareness at all levels. As a consequence, the internal control system can be evaluated regularly and further improved as necessary. Employees can, at any time and independently, deepen their understanding of control methods and design using an information platform that is accessible throughout the entire Group. Evaluating the effectiveness of the internal control system Responsibilities for ensuring the effectiveness of the internal control system in relation to individual entity Internal Control System* and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting.