Automotive segment The core BMW brand caters to a very broad array of customer requirements, ranging from fuel-efficient and innovative models fitted with Efficient Dynamics to outstanding high-performance BMW M vehicles. A wide range of plug-in hybrid vehicles is also available and being continuously expanded. At the same time, the BMW Group continues to redefine the meaning of premium with its BMW i models. With an even greater focus on innovation and sustainability, BMWi embodies the vehicle of the future, with electric drivetrains, connectivity, intelligent lightweight construction, exceptional design and newly developed mobility services. The MINI brand is an icon that promises superior driving fun in the premium small car segment. Rolls-Royce is the ultimate marque in the ultra-luxury segment with a tradition stretching back over more than 100 years. Rolls-Royce Motor Cars specialises in bespoke customer experiences and offers the highest level of both quality and service. The global sales network of the automobile business currently comprises around 3,500 BMW, 1,600 MINI and 140 Rolls-Royce dealerships. Within Germany, sales are conducted through branches of the BMW Group and independent authorised dealerships. Sales outside Germany are handled primarily by subsidiary companies and by independent import companies in some markets. Research and Development A major factor in the success of the BMW Group is its consistent focus on the future. A long tradition of innovation is an integral part of its corporate philosophy. Shaping individual mobility and finding innovative solutions today for the needs of tomorrow is a key driving force. Research and development (R&D) are therefore of key importance for the BMW Group as a premium supplier and ensure its long-term economic success. As part of its Strategy NUMBER ONE > NEXT, the BMW Group is focusing on the topics of electric mobility, digitalisation and autonomous driving. When developing new technologies, the emphasis is always on creating added benefit for customers. Anticipating the needs and wishes of customers in all fields of technology and implementing developments in a way that adds value for the customer are also key prerequisites for the Group’s success going forward. The BMW Group summarises the major trends of individual mobility in the term D+ACES (Design, Autonomous, Connected, Electrified, Services). Accordingly, the BMW Group’s R&D activities include the following five key topics: 1. Design The BMW Group sees design as the characteristic combination of aesthetics and technology. Outstanding design involves focusing keenly on the requirements of customers and anticipating their wishes, enabling the BMW Group to continue finding ideal solutions for the (mobility) needs of its customers. As a premium provider, the BMW Group not only aspires to meeting its customers’ requirements, but also to exceeding their expectations in every respect. A groundbreaking design underlines the distinctive character of each new vehicle and thus strengthens all of the Group’s brands. 2. Autonomous Since 2018, the BMW Group has pooled its considerable development expertise in the fields of state-of-the-art driver assistance systems and highly or fully autonomous driving at its own development centre. During the final phase of development, some 1,800 people will be working there. The clear aim is to create an open platform for highly and fully automated driving that will serve as an industry standard going forward. Today already, the BMW Group offers driver assistant systems for partially automated driving. With the BMW iNEXT, the Group will offer highly automated driving for the first time from 2021. 3. Connected Digital change is of great significance for the automobile industry. One of the most important effects of digitalisation is that the vehicle itself becomes the focal point of the customer’s digital experience. The BMW Group recognised customer trends at an early stage and, with BMW Connected and a growing range of digital offerings, it is well prepared to meet demand arising in this field. This is not merely developing and integrating new technologies and services for the vehicle. The focus is very much on customers and their aspirations for modern-day mobility. Digital services that the customer is used to should be available seamlessly and without restriction – both inside and outside the vehicle. The option of using BMW Group services almost anywhere and at any time is the basic prerequisite for offering a range of digital services geared solely to customers and their personal needs. These include, for example, the availability of personalised and context-based information within the vehicle. For customers, the experience begins before purchasing the vehicle, for example through virtual reality options that offer new ways to configure the vehicle and explore products interactively. The customer can also be kept in the loop while waiting for the new vehicle to be manufactured, thus ensuring greater involvement in the production process from an early stage. The BMW ConnectedDrive Store enables customers to reserve new services at any time for a specified period. The BMW Intelligent Personal Assistant has been available in BMW vehicles since March 2019. Autonomous driving, electrification and evergreater connectivity will open up opportunities for completely new experiences and ways to shape travel in the future. At the same time, however, those opportunities will also change people’s wishes and lifestyles. Precisely this development is supported by the BMW Group’s intelligent platform, which will enable drivers to switch seamlessly and without restrictions from one vehicle to the next with just one customer profile, across each vehicle’s life cycle. Moreover, in future all products and services relating to individual mobility will be bundled here and gradually developed to form a comprehensive digital ecosystem.Alongside automated driving, systematically enhancing the scope of connectivity on the road to a digital, emission-free future is one of the key areas in which the BMW Group is helping transform the mobility sector with its Strategy NUMBER ONE > NEXT. 4. Electrified Another topic of strategic importance for the BMW Group is the continuous optimisation of the energy efficiency of its automobiles and motorcycles, including the electrified vehicles manufactured for the BMW, MINI, Rolls Royce and BMW Motorrad brands. Under the term Efficient Dynamics, the BMW Group has been successfully working for years on reducing fuel consumption and vehicle emissions through the development of highly efficient combustion engines, the electrification of drivetrains, intelligent lightweight construction, improved aerodynamics and coordinated energy management in vehicles. The BMW i brand reflects Efficient Dynamics in its most systematic form. Vehicle architectures customised for electric mobility, innovative electric and plug-in hybrid drivetrains, and the use of new types of materials are the results of an integrated approach that is also reflected in a resource-efficient selection of materials and the intensive use of renewable energy in the production process. This strategy contributes to a very favourable environmental footprint made by BMW i vehicles over their entire product life cycle. As an important pillar of the BMW brand, vehicles equipped with plug-in hybrid drivetrains represent a good alternative product offering for customers. All plug-in models are equipped with a smart energy management system that ensures ideal interaction between the combustion engine and the electric motor. The option to drive fully electrically, added efficiency gained through electric assistance features, and the spontaneous response characteristics provided by the additional electric drivetrain lead to a new harmony of driving pleasure and sustainability. The flexibility of the technologies used makes it possible to extend the broad range of models fitted with plug-in hybrid drivetrains as required. With its MINI Electric, MINI is reinterpreting the urban tradition of the brand for the electric age and reinventing individual mobility for the city. The market launch of the MINI* brand’s first plug-in hybrid in 2017 was followed by the presentation of the all-electric MINI Electric Concept at the IAA Cars in the same year. The series launch of all-electric MINI vehicles is scheduled to begin in 2019. The Vision 100 study presented for the Rolls-Royce brand in 2016 gave customers a first glimpse into the future of automobile luxury powered by electric drivetrains. 5. Services The BMW Group aims to be the leading provider of premium mobility services going forward. To achieve this goal, it is essential to have a clear understanding of the needs of customers worldwide. This knowledge is the basis for providing an attractive, comprehensive range of services. These include easy-to-use, digitally supported mobility services that also feature bring-andcollect services or help customers find free parking spaces in urban environments. At 31 December 2018, over 15,000 people at 16 locations in five countries were working in the BMW Group’s global research and innovations network. Year-on-year, research and development expenditure rose significantly to € 6,890 million (2017: € 6,108 million; + 12.8%). The R&D expenditure ratio stood at 7.1% (2017: 6.2%). The ratio of capitalised development costs to total research and development expenditure (capitalisation ratio) stood at 43.3% for the period under report (2017: 39.7%). Amortisation of capitalised development costs totalled € 1,414 million (2017: € 1,236 million; 14.4%). Further information on R&D expenditure is provided in the “Report on Economic Position (Results of Operations)” and in note 9 to the Group Financial Statements. In 2018, numerous awards and prizes once again underscored the BMW Group’s high level of innovative expertise, particularly in design, the use of innovative technologies as well as the intelligent connectivity of drivers, vehicles and environment.Cooperation Agreements and Partnerships In order to secure the success of the business in the long term, the BMW Group enters into specific cooperation agreements and partnerships with companies both from the automotive sector but also with technology leaders in other industries. Against a backdrop of rapid technological change, the aim of collaborating with external partners is to combine expertise in order to bring innovations to customers within the shortest time possible. The BMW Group and Daimler AG are merging their mobility services in a new joint venture in order to achieve dynamic growth in a highly competitive environment. In this way, both companies are promoting the vision of pure electric and autonomous ondemand mobility simultaneously. The aim is to further expand existing offerings in the areas of car-sharing, ride-hailing, parking, charging und multimodality and to interlock even more closely with one another in the long term. The new mobility offering is to be accessible, intuitive and aligned towards the needs of the user. The newly founded company seeks to increase the quality of urban life and to prepare the way for a world with autonomous vehicles. To coincide with the 15th anniversary of BBA, the joint venture announced extensive investments in new and existing plant structures in order to cover future market requirements. The BMW Group intends to increase its stake in BBA from 50 to 75%. During an anniversary celebration, the BMW Group signed an agreement to that effect with its partner Brilliance China Automotive Holdings Ltd. (CBA). The contractual term of the joint venture, which is due to end in 2028, is to be extended up to 2040. After approval by the Annual General Meeting of CBA on 18 January 2019, the agreement is also subject to regulatory approvals. Additionally, the BMW Group signed an agreement with the Chinese manufacturer Great Wall Motor Company Limited for the production of electric MINI vehicles in China in a 50-50 joint venture. In addition to electric MINI Vehicles, the joint venture, Spotlight Automotive Limited, will also produce electric vehicles for Great Wall Motor. The formal establishment of the new company remains subject to approval from the relevant Chinese authorities. Together with the planned increase of share in BBA, the BMW Group is significantly expanding its presence in China and underscoring its local engagement. Sustainability The BMW Group is a pioneer of sustainability not only within the automotive industry, but across other sectors, too. Long-term thinking and responsible action have long been the foundations of the BMW Group’s distinct identity and its economic success. As early as 1973, the BMW Group was among the first to appoint an environmental officer in the automobile sector. Today, the Sustainability Board, comprising all members of the Board of Management, sets the strategic direction along with binding targets. Since 2001, the BMW Group has been committed to the United Nations Environment Programme, the UN Global Compact and the Cleaner Production Declaration. The principles and importance of managing the business on a sustainable basis are emphasised in the new Strategy NUMBER ONE > NEXT, which includes a clear commitment to preserving resources. The BMW Group remains fully committed to ecological and social sustainability along the entire value chain as well as to comprehensive product responsibility. The BMW Group takes a holistic approach to sustainability management that encompasses the entire value chain. Apart from the reduction of CO2 emissions, key components of the Group’s sustainability strategy include operational environmental protection, sustainability in the supply chain, employee orientation and social commitment. Since 1995, the BMW Group has cut the CO2 emissions of its new vehicles sold in Europe 1 by more than 42 %. Average CO2 emissions in Europe 1 in 2018 amounted to 128 g CO2 / km (adjusted value for 2017: 128 g CO2 / km)2 . In 2018, more than 140,000 electrified vehicles were sold within one year for the first time. 1 EU-28 2 Value according to planned conversion to WLTP 30 Combined Management Report General Information and Group Profile Organisation and Business Model Cooperation Agreements and Partnerships Sustainability With effect from September 2018, all vehicles in the EU are required to be approved in accordance with the new WLTP testing cycle. However, the calculation of CO2 fleet emissions by the EU Commission will not be converted to WLTP until 2021. Therefore, for reporting purposes up to and including 2020, WLTP fleet emissions must be translated back to the previously applicable values calculated in accordance with the outgoing New European Driving Cycle (NEDC). Due to the changed test conditions used for WLTP purposes, values for emissions are higher when translated back to a NEDC basis (NEDC-correlated). In order to ensure comparability, CO2 fleet emissions for 2017 (122 g CO2 / km according to NEDC) were converted to a correlated NEDC value of 128 g CO2 / km under WLTP test conditions and published in the Quarterly Report to 30 June 2018. The conversion to WLTP at the BMW Group went according to plan. The BMW Group has set itself the goal of being a leader in the use of renewable energy in production and the value chain. In 2018, 79 % (2017: 81 %) of the BMW Group’s bought-in electricity worldwide came from renewable sources. In view of increasingly complex supplier relationships, it is important for the BMW Group to work together with suppliers to increase transparency and resource efficiency along the supply chain. The BMW Group requires suppliers to comply with environmental and social standards across the value chain. The BMW Group attaches great importance to training and developing its workforce. In 2018, investment in training and development programmes across the Group amounted to € 373 million (2017: € 349 million). In addition, 1,656 trainees were hired worldwide. A total of 4,964 young people are currently undergoing vocational training or participating in internal programmes to develop young talent. Social engagement is also an integral part of the BMW Group’s understanding of its corporate responsibility. For several years now, the BMW Group has firmly supported intercultural exchange. In partnership with the UN Alliance of Civilizations, the BMW Group presents the Intercultural Innovation Award for exemplary projects in this field. Since 2011, the Company has presented the “BMW Group Award for Social Commitment” every year to employees who have made an exceptional contribution through their outstanding volunteer work. The Group addresses current social challenges, primarily where its strengths make it the most effective. The main focus here is on problem-solving approaches that are internationally applicable and have a tangible long-term impact according to the principle of “helping people to help themselves”. For this purpose, the BMW Group works together with the BMW Foundation Herbert Quandt. BMW Foundation Herbert Quandt In 1959, Herbert Quandt secured the independence of BMWAG, thus laying the foundation for the successful development of the BMW Group. In recognition of his entrepreneurial achievements, in 1970 BMWAG established the “BMW Stiftung Herbert Quandt”, which has meanwhile been renamed the “BMW Foundation Herbert Quandt” with expanded endowment capital. With its Responsible Leadership programmes, a global network and impact-oriented investments, the BMW Foundation Herbert Quandt supports the sustainable development goals of the United Nations’ Agenda 2030. Further information on the topics of sustainability and human resources within the BMW Group is available in the sections Sustainability and Workforce, respectively, of the Group Management Report and in the Sustainable Value Report 2018 published on the Company’s website at. 
RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES As a worldwide-leading provider of premium cars, motorcycles and mobility services, as well as related financial services, the BMW Group is exposed to numerous uncertainties and change. Making full use of the opportunities arising out of change is a fundamental basis of the Group’s corporate success. In order to achieve growth, profitability, efficiency and continued sustainable activities going forward, the BMW Group must consciously assume risks. Management of opportunities and risks is essential for the Group to react appropriately to changes in political, economic, technical or legal conditions. Opportunities and risks which are likely to materialise are taken into account in the Outlook Report. The following sections focus on potential future developments or events, which could result in a positive (opportunity) or a negative (risk) deviation from the BMW Group’s outlook. The earnings impact of risks and opportunities is assessed separately without offsetting. Opportunities and risks are assessed with respect to a medium-term period of two years. As part of the risk management process, all individual and cumulative risks that represent a threat to the success of the business are monitored and managed. Any risks capable of posing a threat to the goingconcern status of the BMW Group are generally avoided. Where no specific reference is made, opportunities and risks relate to the Automotive segment. The scope of entities consolidated in the Report on Risks and Opportunities corresponds to the scope of consolidated entities included in the BMW Group Financial Statements. Risk management system The objective of the risk management system, and the main function of risk reporting, is to identify, measure and, where possible, actively manage internal or external risks that could threaten the attainment of the Group’s corporate targets. The risk management system covers all significant and existential risks to the Group. Group risk management focuses on the criteria of effectiveness, practicability and completeness. Responsibility for risk reporting is not allocated to a centralised function, but is part of the task of each employee and manager, according to their individual function. According to Group-wide rules, every employee and manager has a duty to repor trisks through the relevant reporting channels. Macroeconomic risks and opportunities Economic conditions influence business performance and hence the results of operations, financial position and net assets of the BMW Group. Unforeseen disruptions in global economic relations can have highly unpredictable effects. Macroeconomic risks can lead to reduced purchasing power in the countries and regions affected and lead to reduced demand for the products and services offered by the BMW Group. Macroeconomic risks could – due to sales volume fluctuations – have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. Overall, the risk amounts attached to macroeconomic risks are classified as high. Macroeconomic risks are evaluated on the basis of historical data and cash-flow-at-risk scenario analyses. In view of the political events of recent years, global economic developments continue to be subject to a high degree of uncertainty, in particular with respect to potential barriers to global trade. A reorientation of US economic policy, changes within the EU and possible economic agendas by parties in EU countries that are critical of globalisation and could therefore jeopardise stability could lead to more restrictive trade practices in the coming years. A possible introduction of further trade barriers, including anti-dumping customs duties and duties aimed at protecting national security by the US administration, could have a significantly adverse impact on the BMW Group’s operations through less 93 favourable conditions for importing vehicles. Moreover, countermeasures by the USA’s trading partners could slow down global economic growth and have a greater-than-expected adverse impact on the export of vehicles produced in the USA. The BMW Group’s “production follows the market” strategy involves local production both in the USA and with other important trade partners. Regional production reduces the existing risk of trade barriers. Nevertheless, any increase in trade barriers would have an adverse impact on the BMW Group. The impending Brexit could have a long-term adverse impact on the BMW Group, particularly as a result of increased trade barriers in the form of customs duties in relation to the European single market. Any such trade barriers could have a negative impact on volumes and costs both for vehicles and components produced in the EU for the UK as well as those produced in the UK for the European market. In extreme cases, this could also result in production losses due to delays in customs clearance. In addition, Brexit could lead to reduced customer spending in the wake of weaker economic performance, particularly in the UK. In the short and medium term, uncertainty regarding the outcome of the negotiations with the EU could exacerbate these factors and cause further negative currency effects. A possible further economic downturn of countries in the EU could also potentially reduce growth prospects for the BMW Group. European integration with a unified economic and currency area is an important pillar of economic stability in Europe. The transition in China from an investment-driven to a consumer-driven economy is associated with slower growth rates and, potentially, greater instability in the short to medium term on financial markets. If the Chinese economy were to grow at a significantly slower pace than expected, the consequence would be not only a decline in automobile sales, but also, potentially, lower demand for raw materials, which would have a negative impact above all on emerging economies such as Brazil, Russia or South Africa. Any further drop in raw material prices could result for the BMW Group in lower demand from these countries. Turmoil on the Chinese property, stock and banking markets and an overly rapid increase in interest rates by the US Federal Reserve could pose considerable risks for global financial market stability. Such developments could lead to greater currency fluctuations and have a negative impact on emerging markets in particular. Furthermore, increasing political unrest, military conflicts, terrorist activities, natural disasters or pandemics could have a lasting negative impact on the global economy and international capital markets. The BMW Group addresses macroeconomic risks primarily by internationalising its sales and production structures, in order to minimise the extent to which earnings depend on risks in individual countries and regions. Flexible sales and production processes within the BMW Group increase the limited ability to react quickly to regional economic developments. Should the global economy develop significantly better than presented in the outlook, macroeconomic opportunities could arise for the BMW Group’s revenues and earnings. Significantly stronger GDP growth in China, demand-oriented reforms within the eurozone, a cancellation of Brexit and intensified trade relations between the EU and the UK, further growth stimulus through the tax reform in the USA or more robust consumer spending in emerging markets due to rising raw material prices could result in significantly stronger sales volume growth, reduced competitive pressures and corresponding improvement in pricing. The planned expansion of production capacities will enable emerging opportunities to be exploited to a greater degree. Macroeconomic opportunities that could generate a sustainable impact on earnings are currently classified by the BMW Group as insignificant. Strategic and sector risks and opportunities Changes in legislation and regulatory requirements The sudden introduction of more stringent legislation and regulations, particularly with regard to emissions, safety and consumer protection as well as regional vehicle-related purchase and usage taxes, represents a significant risk for the automobile industry. Countryand sector-specific trade barriers can also change at short notice. A sudden tightening of regulations in any of these areas can necessitate significantly higher investments and ongoing expenses or influence customer behaviour. Risks from changes in legislation and regulatory requirements could have a high impact on earnings over the two-year assessment period. Compared to the previous year, the potential impact on earnings has increased. The risk amount attached to these risks is classified as high. Compared with the previous year, risks arising from the further tightening of emissions laws are assessed as being stable. 94 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities At present, the BMW Group sees increasingly restrictive vehicle emissions regulations, particularly for conventional drivetrain systems, not only in the world’s major markets (Europe, North America and China), but also in other markets such as India and Brazil. In particular, the combination of newly introduced measurement procedures to reflect standard driving cycles (WLTP) and Real Driving Emissions (RDE) tests to reflect actual emissions on the road on the one hand, and significantly lower emissions thresholds on the other, pose major challenges to the automotive sector. The BMW Group is addressing this risk with its Efficient Dynamics concept and is playing a pioneering role in reducing both fuel consumption and emissions within the premium segment. One area of focus of the BMW Group is the systematic electrification of all brands and model series. The product range has been increasingly expanded with electric drivetrain systems in BMWi vehicles since 2013 and with plug-in-hybrid technologies since 2015. These technologies have contributed to the fulfilment of legal standards and requirements with regard to vehicle emissions. Further risks can result from the tightening of existing import and export regulations. These lead primarily to additional expenses but can also restrict imports and exports of vehicles or parts. An established regulatory framework for innovative mobility solutions as well as government incentives are important prerequisites for introducing product innovations, such as autonomous driving, and for scaling up the range of electric mobility offerings. For the electrified vehicles of the BMW Group a faster expansion of charging infrastructure could increase acceptance and help boost sales of planned or recently introduced product innovations compared to forecast. This includes implementation of the 360° ELECTRIC portfolio in the field of electric mobility and collaboration with Toyota on hydrogen fuel cell technology. The BMW Group’s earnings could also be positively affected in the short to medium term by changes in trading policies. A possible reduction in tariff barriers, import restrictions or direct excise duties could lower the cost of materials for the BMW Group, and enable products and services to be offered to customers at lower prices. Further opportunities for the earnings performance of the BMW Group from changes in legislation and regulatory requirements compared to the outlook are classified as insignificant. Market development In addition to economic factors and sector-specific political conditions, increasingly fierce competition among established manufacturers and the emergence of new competitors could also have effects which are difficult to predict. Unforeseen consumer preferences and changes in brand perceptions can give rise to opportunities and risks. If market risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk amount is classified as high. Intense competition, particularly in Western Europe, the USA and China, is a potential cause for lower demand and for fluctuations in the regional distribution and composition of demand for BMW, MINI and Rolls-Royce brand vehicles and for mobility services. Greater competition could put pressure on selling prices and margins. The BMW Group successfully completed the conversion to the new WLTP test procedure in 2018. Markets in Europe were nevertheless subject to a high degree of distortion on the supply side and pressure on selling prices as a result of the conversion. Changes in customer behaviour can also be brought about by changes in attitudes, values, environmental factors, and fuel or energy prices. In order to determine price and margin risks, a scenario approach is used. The BMW Group’s flexible sales and production processes enable risks to be reduced and newly arising opportunities in market and product segments to be taken. Local restrictions affecting product usage in specific sectors may limit BMW Group sales in individual markets. In some urban areas, for instance, local measures are being introduced, including entry restrictions, congestion charges or, in some situations, highly restrictive registration rules. These may impact local demand for the BMW Group vehicles affected and hence have a negative impact on sales, margins and, possibly, the residual values of these vehicles. The BMW Group addresses this risk by offering locally emissions-free vehicles, such as the BMWi3*, which benefit from state subsidies and exemptions. * Fuel consumption and CO2 emissions information are available on page 108. 95 New opportunities are continuously being sought to create even greater added value for customers than currently expected, and thereby to realise significant opportunities with respect to sales growth and pricing. Further development of the product and mobility portfolio and expansion in growth regions offer the most important medium- to long-term growth opportunities for the BMW Group. Continued growth depends above all on the ability to develop innovative products and services and bring them to market. In this context, the BMW Group will focus on developing autonomous driving and on expanding mobility services via the planned joint venture with the Daimler Group. If the negative impact of the current competitive situation is reduced more quickly than expected, additional opportunities will arise for the BMW Group. Compared to the assumptions made in the outlook, the BMW Group expects these opportunities to have no significant earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. Risks and opportunities relating to operations Risks and opportunities relating to production and technologies Risks relating to production processes and technology fields are particularly apparent in potential sources of interruptions in production or additional costs to comply with quality standards under changed market conditions. If risks arising from production processes and technologies were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The corresponding risk amounts are classified as medium. Production stoppages and downtimes due to fire, machine and tooling breakdowns, IT disruptions, damage to infrastructure, power failures, transportation and logistical disruptions represent risks which the BMW Group addresses through appropriate precautions. Production structures and processes are designed from the outset with measures to minimise potential damage and the probability of occurrence. The interchangeability of production facilities, preventative maintenance and management of spare parts across sites play an important role within the production network. Risk is also reduced through flexible working hour models and working time accounts as well as the ability to build individual split models or engine types with a high degree of flexibility – either additionally or alternatively – at plants of the BMW Group, depending on requirements. These various features enable customer wishes to be met appropriately and allow any backlogs caused by temporary interruptions in production to be made up within a short to medium time frame. Other measures worthy of mention include the technical fire protection and anti-flooding measures undertaken at the San Luis Potosí plant in Mexico. Risks arising from business interruptions due to fire in production facilities or at suppliers are also appropriately covered with insurance companies of good credit standing. Measures taken in connection with the current challenges posed by Brexit include building up adequate levels of safety stocks and increasing flexibility along the supply chain. In order to meet high standards in product quality and achieve favourable external ratings (e. g. for product safety), reduce statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations and keep down follow-up costs arising from other changes in planning assumptions, it may be necessary to incur a higher level of expenditure than originally forecast. If warranty expenses, including provisions for recalls, were to exceed the amounts previously recognised and expected, higher allocations to provisions in connection with goodwill and warranty measures would have a negative impact on the BMW Group. Such an allocation, for example, to the warranty provision was made in 2018, among other things in connection with the exhaust gas recirculation cooler. In addition, availability of products may be limited, particularly at the start of production for new vehicle projects. These risks are mitigated through regular audits and the continual improvement of quality management, which ensures the high standard of quality. The BMW Group also recognises appropriate accounting provisions for statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations. These reduce the risk to earnings, as they are already taken into account in the outlook. It cannot be ruled out, however, that damages could arise that are either not covered or not fully covered by provisions. Further information on risks related to provisions for statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations is prosee vided in note 33 to the Group Financial Statements. notes 33 96 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities The BMW Group sees opportunities in production processes and technology fields primarily through the competitive edge gained from mastering new and complex technologies. Opportunities could arise as a result of further technological innovations related to products or processes, as well as from organisational changes which improve efficiency or increase competitiveness of the BMW Group. The early integration of WLTP-related requirements into production and sales planning systems, for instance, enabled the BMW Group to offer its fleet customers the usual product range without interruption. Given the long lead times in developing new products and processes, additional opportunities are not expected to have a significant impact on earnings during the outlook period. Risks and opportunities relating to purchasing Purchasing risks relate primarily to supply risks caused by the failure of a supplier as well as risks associated with the quality of bought-in parts. Production problems incurred by suppliers could lead to increased expenditure for the BMW Group through to interruptions in production and a corresponding reduction in sales. The increasing complexity of the supplier network, especially at the level of lower tier suppliers, whose operations can only be indirectly influenced by the BMW Group, is a further potential cause of downtimes at supplier locations. The increased threat of cyberattacks along the supplier chain also give cause for a more critical assessment of the risk situation, in this case in anticipation of future potential risks relating to security of supply and the protection of internal know-how. If purchasing risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk amount attached to purchasing risks is classified as high. Close cooperation between carmakers and suppliers in the development and production of vehicles and the provision of services generates economic benefits, but also increased dependency. Potential reasons for the failure of individual suppliers include in particular increased IT-related risk, non-compliance with sustainability or quality standards, insufficient financial strength of a supplier, the occurrence of natural hazards, fires and insufficient supply of raw materials. In order to ensure a uniform level of security for all parties concerned along the added value / supply chain, the BMW Group focuses on obtaining evidence of appropriate IT security certification from its suppliers. As part of supplier pre-selection, the BMW Group checks for compliance with the sustainability standards for the supplier network. This includes compliance with internationally recognised human rights and applicable labour and social standards. The principal means for ensuring compliance with the Sustainability Standards is a three-stage risk management system for sustainability. In addition, the technical and financial capabilities of suppliers are monitored, especially where modular-based production is concerned. Supplier sites are assessed for exposure to natural hazards, such as floods or earthquakes, in order to identify supply risks at an early stage and implement appropriate precautions. Fire risks at series suppliers are evaluated by means of questionnaires and selective site inspections. In order to minimise supply risks of raw materials, the BMW Group draws up measures to reduce the use of raw materials or to substitute alternative raw materials. The BMW Group pays particular attention to the quality of the parts built into its vehicles. In order to attain a very high level of quality, it may become necessary to invest in new technological concepts or discontinue planned innovations, with the result that the cost of materials could exceed levels accounted for in the outlook. By monitoring and developing global supplier markets, the BMW Group continuously strives to optimise its competitiveness by working together with the world’s best product and service providers. Within the Purchasing and Supplier Network, opportunities arise above all in the area of global sourcing through increased efficiency and the use of innovations developed by suppliers, which can lead to a broader range of products. Making full use of locationspecific cost factors, in particular through local supplier structures in close proximity to new and existing BMW Group production plants and the introduction of new, innovative production technologies, could lead to lower cost of materials for the BMW Group. One goal of the BMW Group is to manufacture battery cells in Europe and to establish the relevant value chain for cell production. In order to secure the BMW Group’s electrification strategy, a contract was signed with CATL (Contemporary Amperex Technology) for the supply of battery cells. The plant is currently under construction in Thuringia. Integration of previously unidentified innovations from the supplier market in the Group’s product range could provide a further source of opportunities. The BMW Group offers innovative suppliers numerous possibilities for creating specific contractual arrangements which are attractive 97 for those developing innovative solutions. At regular intervals, the BMW Group honours its most inventive suppliers with the Supplier Innovation Award. The BMW Group expects these opportunities to have no significant earnings impact over the assessment period as compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Risks and opportunities relating to sales and marketing In order to sell its products and services, the BMW Group employs a global sales network, comprising primarily independent dealerships, branches, subsidiaries and importers. Any threat to the continued activities of parts of the sales network would entail risks for the BMW Group. The occurrence of sales and marketing risks is associated with a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level is classified as low. New developments in the field of digital communication and connectivity in particular offer new opportunities for the BMW Group’s brands. Since 2017 BMW CarData has made it possible to provide customised service offers to BMW drivers based on data from the vehicle. If customers wish to use a specific service and actively consent to the release of their telematics data, requesting companies receive the data they need for the service in encrypted form via BMW’s secure backend database. This information provides the basis for customised, data-based and innovative service options. Additional opportunities could arise if new sales channels contribute to greater brand reach to customer groups than currently envisaged in the outlook. Digital communication and connectivity enable consumers to be reached on a more targeted and individualised basis, thus strengthening long-term relationships and brand loyalty. This can lead to a more intense product and brand experience for customers, which could result in higher sales volume and have a positive impact on revenues and earnings. The BMW Group invests in advanced marketing concepts in order to intensify customer relationships. The BMW Group estimates the earnings impact as insignificant over the two-year assessment period as compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Information, data protection and IT Increasing digitalisation across all areas of business places considerable demands on the confidentiality, integrity and availability of electronically processed data and the associated use of information technology (IT). In addition to the increased threat of cybercrime, regulations covering the handling of personal data are becoming more stringent, for example as a result of the EU General Data Protection Regulation. If risks relating to information security, data protection and IT were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. Despite extensive security measures, the risks in this area are classified as high. In addition to cyberattacks and direct physical intervention, lack of knowledge or misconduct on the part of employees may also represent a danger to the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information, data and systems. Direct consequences include expenditure required to limit the immediate damage and to restore systems promptly. Negative impacts on revenue due to the non-availability of products and services or disruptions in the production of components or vehicles are also possible. A further indirect result could be reputational damage. Great importance is attached to the protection of the confidentiality, integrity and availability of business information as well as employee and customer data, for instance as a result of unauthorised access or misuse. Data security is an integral component of all business processes and is aligned with the International Standard ISO / IEC 27001. As part of risk management, information security, data protection and IT risks are systematically documented, allocated appropriate measures by the departments concerned and continuously monitored with regard to threat level and risk mitigation. Regular analyses and controls as well as rigorous security management ensure an appropriate level of security. Despite continuous testing and preventative security measures, it is impossible to eliminate risks completely in this area. All employees are required to treat with care information such as confidential business, customer and employee data, to use information systems securely and handle risks with transparency. Group-wide requirements are documented in a comprehensive set of principles, guidelines and instructions, such as, for example, the Privacy Corporate Rules for handling personal data. Regular communication and awareness-raising measures create a high level of security and risk awareness among those involved. Employees receive training to ensure compliance with the applicable requirements and internal rules. With regard to cooperations and business partnerships, the BMW Group protects its intellectual property as well as customer and employee data through clear instructions on information security and data protection and the use of information technology. Information pertaining to key areas of expertise as well as sensitive personal data are subject to particularly stringent security measures. Technical data protection incorporates industry-wide standards and good practices. Responsibility for information security and data protection lies for each Group entity with the Board of Management or relevant management team. 98 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities With the advance of digitalisation, the BMW Group is improving the customer experience and its existing lines of business. At the same time, new digital business segments are emerging, which are mainly focused on information technology. The development and provision of digital services for customers, increased vehicle connectivity and autonomous driving solutions are opening up new opportunities. Through BMW ConnectedDrive and BMW CarData the range of services and apps on offer to customers is constantly being expanded and updated. Starting in March 2019, the BMW Intelligent Personal Assistant will provide customers with an intelligent, digital character that enables voice access to functions and information. The BMW Group expects these opportunities to have no significant earnings impact over the assessment period as compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Financial risks and risks relating to the use of financial instruments Currency risks and opportunities As an internationally operating enterprise, the BMW Group conducts business in a variety of currencies, thus giving rise to currency risks and opportunities. A substantial portion of Group revenues, purchasing and funding occur outside the eurozone (particularly in China and the USA). Cash-flow-atrisk models and scenario analyses are used and continuously developed to measure currency risks and opportunities. If currency risks were to materialise, they could be associated with a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level attached to currency risks is high. Significant opportunities can arise if currency developments are favourable for the BMW Group. Operational currency management is based on the results of currency risk analyses. The BMW Group manages currency risks at both strategic (medium and long term) and operational level (short and medium term). Medium- and long-term measures include increasing production volumes and purchase volumes in foreign currency regions (natural hedging). Currency risks are managed in the short to medium term and for operational purposes by means of hedging on financial markets. The principal objective of this currency management process is to increase planning reliability for the BMW Group. Hedging transactions are entered into only with financial partners of good credit standing. Opportunities are also secured through the use of options during specific market phases. Risks and opportunities relating to raw materials As a large-scale manufacturing company, the BMW Group is exposed to purchase price risks, particularly in relation to raw materials used in vehicle production. The analysis of raw material price risk is based on planned purchases of raw materials and components containing those raw materials. If risks relating to raw materials prices were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. A medium risk level is attached to risks. Significant opportunities could arise if raw materials prices developed favourably for the BMW Group. Changes in commodity prices are monitored on the basis of a well-defined management process. The principal objective is to increase planning reliability for the BMW Group. Price fluctuations for precious metals (platinum, palladium, rhodium), non-ferrous metals (aluminium, copper, lead, nickel) and, to some extent, for steel and steel ingredients (iron ore, coking coal) and energy (gas, electricity) are hedged using financial derivatives and supply contracts with fixed pricing arrangements. Liquidity risks The major part of the Financial Services segment’s credit financing and leasing business is refinanced on capital markets. Liquidity risks can arise in the form of rising refinancing costs or from restricted access to funds as a consequence of the general market situation. If liquidity risks were to materialise, they would be likely to have a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk amount associated with liquidity risk, including the risk of the BMW Group’s rating being downgraded, which would lead to an increase in financing costs, is classified as low. 99 Based on the experience of the financial crisis, a minimum liquidity concept has been drawn up, which is rigorously adhered to and continuously developed. Use of the “matched funding principle” to finance the Financial Services segment’s operations eliminates liquidity risks to a large extent. Solvency is assured at all times throughout the BMW Group by maintaining a liquidity reserve and by the broad diversification of refinancing sources. Regular measurement and monitoring ensure that cash inflows and outflows for the various maturities and currencies offset each other. This approach is incorporated in the BMW Group’s target liquidity concept. The liquidity position is monitored continuously and managed through Group-wide planning of financial requirements and funding. A diversified refinancing strategy reduces dependency on any specific type of instrument. Moreover, the BMW Group’s solid financial and earnings position results in high credit ratings from internationally recognised rating agencies. Further information on risks in conjunction with financial instruments is provided in note 39 to the Group Financial Statements. Risks and opportunities relating to pension obligations Pension obligations are influenced in particular by fluctuations of market yields on corporate bonds, as well as by other economic and demographic parameters. Opportunities and risks arise depending on changes in these parameters. If risks relating to pension obligations materialised, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. Despite the high level of external funding, the risk amounts relating to pension obligations are classified as high. Within a favourable capital market environment, the return generated by growth-oriented pension assets may exceed expectations and reduce the deficit of the relevant pension plans. This could have a significantly favourable impact on the net asset position of the BMW Group. Future pension payments are discounted on the basis of market yields on high-quality corporate bonds. These yields are subject to market fluctuation and therefore influence the level of pension obligations. Changes in other parameters, such as rises in inflation and longer life expectancy, also impact pension obligations and payments. Regulatory requirements can influence the amount of pension obligations. The BMW Group’s pension obligations are mainly held in external pension funds or trust arrangements and the related assets legally separated from those of the Group. The amount of funds required to finance pension payments out of operations in the future is substantially reduced by the fact that the Group’s pension obligations are mainly settled out of pension fund assets. The pension assets of the BMW Group comprise interest-bearing securities, equities, real estate and other investment classes. Assets held by pension funds and trust arrangements are monitored continuously and managed on a risk-and-return basis. Diversification of investments also helps to mitigate risk. In order to reduce fluctuations in pension funding shortfalls, investments are structured to match the timing of pension payments and the expected development of pension obligations. Remeasurements on the liability and fund asset sides are recognised net of deferred taxes in other comprehensive income and hence directly in equity (within revenue reserves). Further information on risks in conjunction with pension provisions is provided in note 32 to the Group Financial Statements. Risks and opportunities relating to the Financial Services segment The categories of risk relating to financial services comprise credit and counterparty risk, residual value risk, interest rate risk, operational risks and liquidity risk. Evaluation of liquidity risk for the Financial Services segment is included in the liquidity risk category for the Group as a whole. The segment’s total risk exposure was covered at all times during the 2018 financial year by the available risk-covering assets. As a result, the Financial Services segment’s risk-bearing capacity was assured at all times. Credit and counterparty risks and opportunities relating to the Financial Services segment Credit and counterparty default risk arises within the Financial Services segment if a contractual partner (e. g. a customer or dealer) either becomes unable or only partially able to fulfil its contractual obligations, so that lower income is generated or losses incurred. If credit and counterparty risks were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk amount is classified as medium. The BMW Group classifies potential opportunities in this area as significant. see note 39 see notes 32 100 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities Initial and continuous creditworthiness testing is an important aspect of the BMW Group’s credit risk management. For this reason, every borrower’s creditworthiness is tested for all credit financing and lease contracts entered into by the BMW Group. Opportunities can arise when the managed portfolio presents itself over time better than as was estimated at the provision of the credit. An intense management of the purchase process and the securities evaluation as well as the development of macroeconomic factors can strengthen the opportunities. In the case of retail customer financing, creditworthiness is assessed using validated scoring systems integrated into the purchasing process. In the area of dealership financing, creditworthiness is assessed by means of ongoing credit monitoring and an internal rating system that takes account not only of the material credit standing of the borrower, but also of qualitative factors such as past reliability in business relations. Changes in the creditworthiness of customers arising during the credit term are covered by risk provisioning procedures. The credit risk of the individual customers is quantified on a monthly basis and, depending on the outcome, taken into account within the risk provisioning system. Macroeconomic developments are currently subject to a higher degree of volatility. If developments are more favourable than assumed in the outlook, credit losses may be reduced, leading to a positive earnings impact. Residual value risks and opportunities relating to the Financial Services segment Risks and opportunities arise in conjunction with leasing contracts if the market value of a leased vehicle at the end of the contractual term of a lease differs from the residual value estimated at the inception of the lease and factored into the lease payments. A residual value risk exists if the expected market value of the vehicle at the end of the contractual term is lower than its estimated residual value at the date the contract is entered into. If residual value risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact from the Group’s perspective over the two-year assessment period. A high earnings impact would then arise for the affected Financial Services and Automotive segments. The risk amount is classified as high for the Group as a whole. Opportunities can arise out of a positive deviation from the original residual value forecast. The BMW Group classifies potential residual value opportunities as significant. Each vehicle’s estimated residual value is calculated on the basis of historical external and internal data. This estimation provides the expected market value of the vehicle at the end of the contractual period. Developments on pre-owned car markets represent an important factor. In 2018, diesel engines were again the subject matter of political discussions in the European region. Pre-owned car markets in the premium segment responded here with price declines for diesel vehicles. As part of the management of residual value risks, the net present value of risk costs is calculated at contract inception. Market developments are observed throughout the contractual period and the risk assessment updated. 