With the future program TOGETHER – Strategy 2025
announced in 2016, we aim to make the Volkswagen Group
more focused, efficient, innovative, customer-oriented and
sustainable, and systematically geared towards generating
profitable growth. The program creates the framework and
lays the cornerstones for us to achieve our vision of being
one of the world’s leading providers of sustainable mobility.
The time horizon until 2025 shows that our thoughts
and actions are long-term and future-oriented. The term
TOGETHER describes the mindset that will be even more vital
to the Volkswagen Group’s long-term success going forward.
Our intention with the new Group strategy is for everyone in
the Volkswagen Group to join us in producing exciting vehicles and forward-looking, tailor-made mobility solutions that
will continue to inspire our customers, meeting their diverse
needs with a portfolio of strong brands. Every day, we actively
assume and exercise responsibility in relation to the environment, safety and society, and we wish to be a role model in
these areas. Integrity, reliability, quality and passion thus
form the basis for our work. In this way, we will aim for
technological leadership in the industry, ensure our competitive profitability and remain an excellent, reliable and
secure employer at the same time.
The Code of Collaboration formulated as part of the
future program is the foundation on which the Group
strategy rests. This Code describes how collaboration is to
take place within the Group and between individuals in their
day-to-day work. Its core values are encapsulated in the terms
“genuine”, “straightforward”, “open-minded”, “as equals” and
“united”.
Goals and Strategies
We are striving for lasting success in tomorrow’s world of mobility and intend to be one of the
world’s leading providers of sustainable mobility. This is the reason we have anchored the
future program TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 in the Group.
FUTURE PROGRAM TOGETHER – STRATEGY 2025
Sustainable
growth
Excellent
employer Competitive
protability
Role model for
environment, safety
and integrity
Excited
customers
52 Goals and Strategies Group Management Report
FOUR BUILDING BLOCKS OF THE FUTURE PROGRAM
TOGETHER – STRATEGY 2025
Our Group strategy comprises a raft of far-reaching strategic
decisions and specific initiatives aimed at safeguarding the
long-term future and generating profitable growth. It is
composed of four building blocks which cover strategic
Group initiatives. We regularly review the progress of these
initiatives so as to analyze the significance, suitability and
target achievement of the measures defined. We are thus able
to adjust the Group initiatives specifically according to the
dynamic changes occurring within our Company.
The first of these is the transformation of the core automotive business. Developing, building and selling vehicles
will remain essential for the Volkswagen Group going forward. However, there will be far-reaching and lasting changes
to this business in the future. That is the reason why we are
comprehensively restructuring our core business to face this
new era of mobility.
The second key building block in our Group strategy is
establishing a new mobility solutions business. In this business, we are developing innovative and efficient, attractive
yet profitable mobility services that are tailored to customer
requirements with the goal of being one of the leading
providers in this growth market in the future.
With the third key building block, we are intensifying our
traditionally excellent innovative strength and placing it on
an even broader footing. This is necessary both for the transformation of our core business and for the establishment
of the new mobility solutions business. To this end, we are
pushing ahead with the digital transformation in all parts of
the Company.
Becoming one of the world’s leading providers of sustainable mobility calls for substantial capital expenditure.
This will be financed in particular through efficiency gains
along the entire value chain – from product development and
procurement through to production and distribution as well
as in the central supporting areas. Additional funds for future
investments can also be generated by optimizing the existing
portfolio of brands and equity investments. Through the
fourth key building block of the Group strategy we will
safeguard the financing of the Volkswagen Group and place it
on a solid basis.
GOALS AND KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS OF THE GROUP’S
STRATEGY
The strategic initiatives describe how we intend to achieve
our vision of being one of the world’s leading providers of
sustainable mobility. For this purpose, we have defined four
target dimensions – excited customers, excellent employer,
role model for the environment, safety and integrity, and
competitive profitability – which are designed to help us
grow sustainably.
Although these target dimensions apply throughout the
Group, the strategic KPIs that we will use in the future to
measure how well we have implemented our Group strategy,
depend on the respective business model. After all, the busi-

BUILDING BLOCKS AND STRATEGIC GROUP INITIATIVES
TRANSFORM
CORE BUSINESS
BUILD
MOBILITY SOLUTIONS
BUSINESS
· Establish mobility
 solutions business
· Develop and expand
 attractive and protable
 smart mobility oering
· Improve
 operational excellence
· Optimize
 business portfolio
· Integrate strategy
 and planning process
SECURE
FUNDING
STRENGTHEN
INNOVATION POWER
· Drive digital transformation
· Create organization 4.0
· Sharpen positioning of brands
· Develop successful vehicle and drivetrain portfolio
· Partner with regional players to win in economy segment
· Streamline modular toolkits
· Implement model line organization
· Realign “Components” business
· Develop battery technology as new core competency
· Develop self-driving system for autonomous vehicles and articial intelligence
· Develop best-in-class user experience across brands and customer touchpoints
Group Management Report Goals and Strategies 53
ness model for our passenger car-producing brands is
different from that for trucks and buses and also from that of
our Power Engineering Business Area and our services
business.
In the following, we describe the Group’s strategic goals
attached to these target dimensions.
The strategic KPIs of the competitive profitability target
dimension have been defined and anchored uniformly in the
Group. As the new Group strategy has yet to be specified in
detail, the content of some strategic KPIs in the other target
dimensions is still being determined. The relevance of the
KPIs is reviewed at Group level and their focus continuously
monitored and adjusted as necessary. We report on the
defined nonfinancial strategic KPIs in the “Corporate
Governance Report” and “Sustainable Value Enhancement”
sections.
Target dimension: excited customers
This target dimension focuses on the diverse needs of our
customers and on tailor-made mobility solutions. We aspire
to exceed our customers’ expectations, generating maximum
benefit for them. That calls not only for the best products, the
most efficient solutions and the best service, but also for
flawless quality and an outstanding image. We want to excite
our existing customers, win over new ones and retain their
loyalty in the long term – because only loyal and faithful
customers will recommend us to others.
The strategic KPIs consist of the conquest rate and KPIs
pertaining to loyalty, customer satisfaction and quality.
Target dimension: excellent employer
Skilled and dedicated employees are one of the keys to
sustainable success. We wish to promote their satisfaction
and motivation by means of equal opportunities, an
attractive and modern working environment, and a forwardlooking organization of work. Exemplary leadership and
corporate culture forms the foundation for this, enabling us
to retain our core workforce and attract new talent.
The strategic KPIs of this target dimension cover internal
employer attractiveness determined by means of the opinion
survey, external employer attractiveness, an external
employer ranking as well as a KPI pertaining to cross-brand
exchange and rotation and the diversity index.
Target dimension: role model for environment, safety and integrity
Every day, we at the Volkswagen Group assume and exercise
responsibility in relation to the environment, safety and
society. This is reflected in our thoughts and actions and in all
our decisions in equal measure.
We pay particular attention to the use of resources and
the emissions of our product portfolio as well as those of our
sites and plants, with the goal of continuously improving our
carbon footprint and lowering pollutant emissions. Through
innovations and outstanding quality, we aim for maximum
product safety.
The most important principles in this process include
compliance with laws and regulations, the establishment of
secure processes, and dealing openly with mistakes so that
they can be avoided or rectified in the future. In terms of
integrity, Volkswagen aims to become a role model for a
modern, transparent and successful enterprise.
The strategic KPIs of this target dimension include the
decarbonization index and KPIs pertaining to emissions
figures, compliance, a culture of dealing openly with mistakes, and integrity.
Target dimension: competitive profitability
Investors judge us by whether we are able to meet our
obligations as regards interest payments and debt repayments. As equity holders, they expect appropriate dividends
and a long-term increase in the value of their shares.
We make investments with a view to achieving profitable
growth and strengthening our competitiveness, thus keeping
the Volkswagen Group on a firm footing and ensuring it
remains an attractive investment option.
The goals we have set ourselves are operational excellence
in all business processes and becoming the benchmark for
the entire industry.
The strategic KPIs are operationalized for internal management purposes: target and actual data are derived from
Volkswagen Group figures.
STRATEGIC KPIS: COMPETITIVE PROFITABILITY
2015 2025
Operating return on sales1 6.0% 7 to 8%
Research and development ratio
(R&D ratio) in the Automotive
Division 7.4% ~6%
Capex/sales revenue in the
Automotive Division 6.9% ~6%
Net cash flow in the
Automotive Division €8,887 million >€10 billion
Payout ratio negative 30%
Net liquidity in the Automotive
Division
€24,522 million,
11.5%
~10% of
consolidated
sales revenue
Return on investment (ROI) in the
Automotive Division –0.2% >15%
1 2015 before special items. 
54 Internal Management System and Key Performance Indicators Group Management Report
The Volkswagen Group’s performance and success can be
measured by both financial and nonfinancial key performance indicators. With the Operational Excellence Group
initiative, we aim to improve these indicators throughout all
areas and along the entire value chain.
In the following, we first describe the internal management process and then explain the Volkswagen Group’s core
performance indicators.
INTERNAL MANAGEMENT PROCESS IN THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP
The Integrate Strategy and Planning Process Group initiative
is focused on continuity and even closer dovetailing of the
Group and brand strategies with the operational planning
process. This enhances transparency when it comes to the
financial assessment and the evaluation of directional decisions. The operational medium-term planning that is conducted once a year and generally covers a period of five years
is incorporated into the strategic planning as a key management element of the Group.
Medium-term planning forms the core of our operational
planning and is used to formulate and safeguard the
requirements for realizing strategic projects designed to meet
Group targets in both technical and economic terms – and
particularly in relation to earnings, cash flow and liquidity
effects. In addition, it is used to coordinate all business areas
with respect to the strategic action areas concerned: functions/processes, products and markets.
When planning the Company’s future, the individual planning components are determined on the basis of the timescale involved:
> the long-term unit sales plan, which sets out market and
segment growth and then derives the Volkswagen Group’s
delivery volumes from them,
> the product program as the strategic, long-term factor
determining corporate policy,
> capacity and utilization planning for the individual sites.
The coordinated results of the upstream planning processes
are used as the basis for the medium-term financial planning:
the Group’s financial planning, including the brands and
business fields, comprises the income statement, cash flow
and balance sheet planning, profitability and liquidity, as well
as the upfront investments needed for alternative products
and the implementation of strategic options. The first year of
the medium-term planning period is fixed and a budget
drawn up for the individual months. This is planned in detail
down to the level of the operating cost centers.
The budget is reviewed each month throughout the year
Group Management Report Internal Management System and Key Performance Indicators 55
CORE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS IN THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP
The Volkswagen Group’s internal management system is
based on nine core performance indicators, which are derived
from our strategic goals:
> Deliveries to customers
> Sales revenue
> Operating result
> Operating return on sales
> Research and development ratio (R&D ratio) in the Automotive Division
> Capex/sales revenue in the Automotive Division
> Net cash flow in the Automotive Division
> Net liquidity in the Automotive Division
> Return on investment (ROI) in the Automotive Division
Deliveries to customers are defined as handovers of new
vehicles to the end customer. This figure shows the popularity of our products and is the measure we use to determine
our competitive position in the various markets. Deliveries
are closely related to our targets of exciting our customers,
being a role model in terms of the environment, safety and
integrity, and being an excellent employer. One of the most
important prerequisites for the Company’s long-term success
is a strong brand portfolio that – on the basis of outstanding
quality – offers tailor-made mobility solutions with safe,
resource-efficient vehicles, thus meeting the diverse needs of
customers. Demand for our products guarantees not only
unit sales and production, but also full utilization of our sites
and the jobs of our employees. The goals we are striving for
cannot be achieved without a skilled, dedicated workforce
and a consensus on shared values.
Sales revenue, which does not include the figures for our
equity-accounted Chinese joint ventures, reflects our market
success in financial terms. Following adjustment for our use
of resources, the operating result reflects the Company’s
actual business activity and documents the economic success
of our core business. The operating return on sales is the ratio
of the operating result to sales revenue.
The research and development ratio (R&D ratio) in the
Automotive Division shows total research and development
costs in relation to sales revenue. Research and development
costs comprise a range of expenses, from futurology through
to the development of marketable products. Particular emphasis is placed on the environmentally friendly orientation of
our product portfolio, digitalization and new technologies.
The R&D ratio underscores the efforts made to ensure the

Company’s future viability: the goal of competitive profitability geared to sustainable growth.
The ratio of capex (investments in property, plant and
equipment, investment property and intangible assets,
excluding capitalized development costs) to sales revenue in
the Automotive Division reflects both our innovative power
and our future competitiveness. It shows our capital expenditure – largely for modernizing, expanding and digitalizing
our product range and for environmentally friendly
drivetrains, as well as for adjusting production capacities and
improving production processes – in relation to the Automotive Division’s sales revenue.
Net cash flow in the Automotive Division represents the
excess funds from operating activities available for dividend
payments, for example. It is calculated as cash flows from
operating activities less cash flows from investing activities
attributable to operating activities.
Net liquidity in the Automotive Division is the total of
cash, cash equivalents, securities, loans and time deposits not
financed by third-party borrowings. To safeguard our business activities, we have formulated the strategic target that
net liquidity in the Automotive Division should amount to
approximately 10% of the consolidated sales revenue.
We use the return on investment (ROI) to calculate the
return on invested capital for a particular period in the Automotive Division, including the Chinese joint ventures on a
proportionate basis, by calculating the ratio of the operating
result after tax to average invested capital. If the return on
investment (ROI) exceeds the market cost of capital, the value
of the Company has increased. This is how we measure the
financial success of our brands, locations and vehicle
projects.
You can find information on and explanations of the sales
figures and the Volkswagen Group’s financial key performance indicators on pages 101 to 107 and on pages 114 to
128, respectively.
Detailed descriptions of our activities and additional
nonfinancial key performance indicators in the areas of sustainability, research and development, procurement, production, sales and marketing, quality assurance, employees,
information technology and the environment can be found
in the chapter entitled “Sustainable Value Enhancement”
beginning on page 133 of this annual report. Nonfinancial
key performance indicators related to compliance are
described in the “Corporate Governance Report” on page 65. 
56 Structure and Business Activities Group Management Report
OUTLINE OF THE LEGAL STRUCTURE OF THE GROUP
Volkswagen AG is the parent company of the Volkswagen
Group. It develops vehicles and components for the Group’s
brands, but also produces and sells vehicles, in particular
passenger cars and light commercial vehicles for the Volkswagen Passenger Cars and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles
brands. In its capacity as parent company, Volkswagen AG
holds indirect or direct interests in AUDI AG, SEAT S.A.,
ŠKODA AUTO a.s., Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG, Scania AB,
MAN SE, Volkswagen Financial Services AG, Volkswagen Bank
GmbH and a large number of other companies in Germany
and abroad. More detailed disclosures are contained in
the list of shareholdings in accordance with sections 285 and
313 of the Handelsgesetzbuch (HGB – German Commercial
Code), which can be accessed at www.volkswagenag.com/en/
InvestorRelations.html and is part of the annual financial
statements.
Volkswagen AG is a vertically integrated energy supply
company as defined by section 3 no. 38 of the Energiewirtschaftsgesetz (EnWG – German Energy Industry Act) and
is therefore subject to the provisions of the EnWG. In the electricity sector, Volkswagen AG generates, sells and distributes
electricity together with a Group subsidiary.
Volkswagen AG’s Board of Management is the ultimate
body responsible for managing the Group. The Supervisory
Board appoints, monitors and advises the Board of Management; it is consulted directly on decisions that are of fundamental significance for the Company.
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE GROUP
The Volkswagen Group is one of the leading multibrand
groups in the automotive industry. The Company’s business
activities comprise the Automotive and Financial Services
divisions. All brands within the Automotive Division – with
the exception of the Volkswagen Passenger Cars and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles brands – are independent legal
entities.
The Automotive Division comprises the Passenger Cars,
Commercial Vehicles and Power Engineering business areas.
The Passenger Cars Business Area essentially consolidates the
Volkswagen Group’s passenger car brands. Activities focus on
the development of vehicles and engines, the production and
sale of passenger cars, and the genuine parts business. The
product portfolio ranges from fuel-efficient compact cars to
luxury vehicles and also includes motorcycles, and will
gradually be supplemented by mobility solutions.
The Commercial Vehicles Business Area primarily comprises the development, production and sale of light commercial vehicles, trucks and buses from the Volkswagen
Commercial Vehicles, Scania and MAN brands, the corresponding genuine parts business and related services. The
collaboration between the MAN and Scania commercial
vehicle brands is coordinated within the TRATON GROUP. The
commercial vehicles portfolio ranges from pickups to heavy
trucks and buses.
The Power Engineering Business Area combines the largebore diesel engines, turbomachinery, special gear units,
propulsion components and testing systems businesses.
The activities of the Financial Services Division comprise
dealer and customer financing, vehicle leasing, direct banking
and insurance activities, as well as fleet management and
mobility offerings.
With its brands, the Volkswagen Group is present in all
relevant markets around the world. The Group’s key sales
markets currently include Western Europe, China, the USA,
Brazil, Russia and Mexico.
Volkswagen AG and the Volkswagen Group are managed
by the Volkswagen AG Board of Management in accordance
with the Volkswagen AG Articles of Association and the rules
of procedure for Volkswagen AG’s Board of Management
issued by the Supervisory Board.

Structure and Business Activities
This chapter describes the legal and organizational structure of the Volkswagen Group
and explains the material changes in 2018 with respect to equity investments. 
Group Management Report Structure and Business Activities 57
To further enhance its leadership and management model,
the Volkswagen Group introduced an additional internal
operational structure in spring 2018. Volkswagen is convinced that this will allow better use of existing competences
and economies of scale, make it possible to leverage synergies
more systematically and accelerate decision making.
In addition to the Finance & IT, Human Resources and
Integrity and Legal Affairs divisions, the Volkswagen Group
collaborates across six operating units and the China region,
these being the “Volume”, “Premium”, “Sport & Luxury”,
“Truck & Bus” brand groups, as well as the Components &
Procurement and Financial Services operating units. The
“Volume” brand group comprises the Volkswagen Passenger
Cars, SEAT, ŠKODA and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles
brands. The Audi, Lamborghini and Ducati brands are
brought together in the “Premium” brand group. “Sport &
Luxury” is comprised of the Porsche, Bentley and Bugatti
brands. The “Truck & Bus” brand group is the umbrella for
the Scania and MAN brands. Components & Procurement will
function as one unit spanning all of the brands and supporting them. The Financial Services business has been
combined into a single unit.
 This prepares the Volkswagen Group for a management
structure that is simpler, leaner and more effective, and
strengthens the brands, giving them more autonomy. In line
with the principle of subsidiarity, decisions will be taken at
the lowest competent level, close to business operations.
At the same time, spreading the Group’s management
duties more broadly means that responsibility is assigned
more clearly and definitively. Every member of the Board of
Management has assumed additional higher-level duties for
the Group. At the same time, the members of the Board of
Management of Volkswagen AG have responsibility for a
brand group or operating unit, improving collaboration
between the brands and the Group as a whole and ensuring
that management of the Group is a shared undertaking.
Each brand in the Volkswagen Group is managed by a
brand board of management, which ensures its independent
and self-contained development and business operations. To
the extent permitted by law, the board adheres to the Group
targets and requirements laid down by the Board of
Management of Volkswagen AG, as well as with the agreements in the brand groups. This allows Group-wide interests
to be pursued, while at the same time safeguarding and
reinforcing each brand’s specific characteristics. Matters that
are of importance to the Group as a whole are submitted to
the Group Board of Management in order to reach agreement
between the parties involved, to the extent permitted by law.
The rights and obligations of the statutory bodies of the
relevant brand company remain unaffected.
The companies of the Volkswagen Group are managed by
their respective managements on their own responsibility. In
addition to the interests of their own companies, the
management of each individual company takes into account
the interests of the Group, the relevant brand group and the
individual brands in accordance with the framework laid
down by law.
At Group level, committees also address key strategic
issues, for example relating to product planning, investments, risks management and management issues. The
portfolio of these committees and the regulation landscape
at Group level was revised in the reporting year and, in the
course of this, a committee was established to manage the
technology strategy. This has reduced complexity and reinforced governance within the Group.
Within our future program TOGETHER – Strategy 2025,
the Organization 4.0 Group initiative is also supporting the
Company’s transformation. The aim of this initiative is to
connect activities across divisions, initiate new organizational approaches and anchor these in the Group for the long
term. This will not only enable but actively create holistic
stimulus for innovation, entrepreneurship and change.
MATERIAL CHANGES IN EQUITY INVESTMENTS
The control and profit and loss transfer agreement between
MAN SE, as the controlled company, and TRATON SE (at that
time Volkswagen Truck & Bus AG), a wholly owned subsidiary
of Volkswagen AG, as the controlling company, came into
force upon its entry in the commercial register on July 16,
2013. The conclusion of the control and profit and loss
transfer agreement replaced, the group based on the de facto
exercise of management control with a contractual group,
permitting considerably more efficient and less bureaucratic
cooperation between the MAN Group and the rest of the
Volkswagen Group. In the summer of 2018, the Higher
Regional Court in Munich made a final decision in the award
proceedings regarding the appropriateness of the cash
settlement and the right to compensation for the noncontrolling interest shareholders of MAN SE, ruling that the
cash settlement amount set out in the contract should be
increased to €90.29 per share and the annual compensation
to €5.47 gross per share. Following the entry of the final
decisions in the commercial register in August 2018, the
noncontrolling interest shareholders were entitled to tender
their shares in accordance with section 305 of the Aktiengesetz (AktG – German Stock Corporation Act) within a twomonth period. The decision in the award proceedings
resulted in a significant increase in the annual compensation
to be paid to noncontrolling interest shareholders of MAN SE.
In the opinion of the Board of Management at TRATON SE (at
 
58 Structure and Business Activities Group Management Report
that time TRATON AG), this was no longer proportionate to
the profit transfer from MAN SE and other benefits stipulated
in the control and profit and loss transfer agreement;
TRATON SE therefore exercised its right to extraordinary
termination in accordance with section 304(4) of the German
Stock Corporation Act on August 22, 2018 and terminated the
control and profit and loss transfer agreement effective
January 1, 2019. As of year-end 2018, TRATON SE held
87.04 (75.73)% of the ordinary shares and 83.05 (46.95)% of
the preferred shares in MAN SE. Following the announcement
of the termination of the control and profit and loss transfer
agreement and the recording thereof in the commercial
register on January 3, 2019, the noncontrolling shareholders
of MAN SE once again had the right to tender their shares to
TRATON SE, pursuant to the provisions of the control and
profit and loss transfer agreement, within a two-month
period at a cash settlement price of €90.29.
With the Optimize business portfolio Group initiative, the
Board of Management intends to ensure the Volkswagen
Group’s competitiveness and financial performance as a
forward-looking mobility provider by focusing on its core
business. To this end, we are continuously monitoring and
analyzing our portfolio and can respond in a timely manner
by making any necessary purchases or sales.
LEGAL FACTORS INFLUENCING BUSINESS
Like other international companies, the business of Volkswagen companies is affected by numerous laws in Germany
and abroad. In particular, there are legal requirements
relating to development, products, production and distribution, as well as supervisory, data protection, financial, company, commercial, capital market, anti-trust and tax regulations and regulations relating to labor, banking, state aid,
energy, environmental and insurance law. 
Fleet carbon emissions1
The BMW Group is continually reducing the carbon
emissions of its fleet of vehicles by equipping them with
highly efficient engines and electrified drivetrain systems. Thanks to the rigorous deployment of Efficient
Dynamics technologies, our vehicles also set standards
in terms of dynamism and driving pleasure.
In 2014, the volume of carbon emissions produced by
our vehicle fleet sold in Europe1
 decreased slightly to
130 grams CO2 / km (2013: 133 grams CO2 / km; –2.3%).
The scale of the decrease in fleet emissions in 2014
was therefore not as pronounced as originally forecast,
mainly reflecting the impact of a higher-value model
mix on the one hand and the later-than-planned availability of the new MINI on the other. In the Annual
Report 2013, we had forecast a “moderate decrease” for
the financial year 2014.Research and development play a vital role for the BMW
Group, given its broad range of products and the high
number of new models. Our vehicles and services also
set standards in terms of connecting car occupants
with the outside world. During 2014, a total of 11,779
employees were engaged throughout the BMW Group’s
global research and innovation network at twelve locations spread over five countries, to deliver the best
product quality possible and develop innovative technologies for customers.
Research and development expenditure for the year decreased by 4.7% to € 4,566 million (2013: € 4,793* million). The research and development ratio was 5.7%,
0.6 percentage points lower than in the previous year
(2013: 6.3%). The ratio of capitalised development costs
to total research and development costs for the period
(capitalisation ratio) was 32.8% (2013: 36.4%). Amortisation of capitalised development costs totalled € 1,068 million (2013: € 1,069 million). Further information on research and development expenditure is provided in the
section “Results of Operations, Financial Position and
Net Assets” and in note 11 to the Group Financial Statements.
Drive concepts: setting the course for the future
In line with our commitment to Efficient Dynamics, we
are working continuously to optimise both our range
of combustion engines featuring TwinPower turbo technology on the one hand and the various electric motors,
energy storage and energy management systems for
electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles developed for BMW
eDrive on the other. In the long term, the BMW Group
is also promoting the development of hydrogen-powered
fuel cell technology as a source of energy.
The new Efficient Dynamics family of engines, comprising 3-, 4- and 6-cylinder power units, reflects the
output of a rigorous and consistently applied development process. Higher aluminium content plus the use
of magnesium (which is even lighter) has enabled the
BMW Group to significantly reduce the average weight
of its latest range of engines. The first of this new generation of engines is a 1.5-litre, 3-cylinder petrol engine,
which has found its first home in the BMW i8. The BMW
Group also presented the first 4-cylinder versions of
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
the new engine family during the first half of 2014. Due
to commonalities in the design of our petrol and diesel
engines, the percentage of identical parts used can be as
high as 60%, while the structural similarities between
petrol and diesel engines are around 40%.
The BMW i8 combines the driving performance of a
sports car with the fuel consumption of a compact-class
model. The plug-in hybrid system developed for the
BMW i8 meets the very highest specifications in terms
of driving dynamics, efficiency, practical usefulness
and quality, thus underlining the BMW Group’s technological leadership in the field of drive system development. In the long term, the BMW Group also plans to
transfer eDrive technology to other core brand models.
The BMW 3 Series plug-in hybrid prototype unveiled in
2014 provides a preview of how extreme efficiency can
be combined with ultimate driving pleasure in the world’s
most successful premium-class sedan. The prototype
features a 4-cylinder petrol engine from the new Efficient
Dynamics family with TwinPower turbo technology
combined with an electric drive system. The outcome is
a car that delivers sporty driving dynamics similar to
being behind the wheel of a conventionally powered
6-cylinder BMW 3 Series model, but with far lower fuel
consumption. The possible integration of a plug-in
hybrid system is already a firm part of our thinking when
new BMW and MINI models are being developed, thus
ensuring, among other things, that future model variants
equipped with hybrid drive technology will be just as
suitable for everyday use as their standard counterparts.
The BMW Group took a further step forward in the field
of powertrain electrification with its presentation in
2014 of the newly developed range of hybrid drive systems intended for high-performance electric drives
based on Power eDrive technology. In future-generation
plug-in hybrid vehicles, around two-thirds of the drive
system’s output should come from the Power eDrive
electric system and around one-third from the TwinPower
turbo technology combustion engine. The BMW Group
is pressing ahead with the development of batterypowered drive systems (as in the BMW i3) and plug-in
hybrids, as well as in other areas such as fuel-cell electric
technology and high-voltage electrified systems (Power
eDrive). With its wide range of drive systems, the BMW
Group can and will continue to be able to react flexibly * Prior year figures have been adjusted in accordance with IAS 8, see note 9.
39 Combined Management Report
to the needs of customers and new regulations stipulated
by legislators.
Intelligently designed lightweight construction
Lightweight construction is an essential component of
the BMW Group’s Efficient Dynamics strategy and
firmly embedded in its basic understanding of modern
manufacturing. The consistent use of lightweight materials in vehicle design is particularly important with
electrically powered cars, as not only the battery capacity,
but also the total weight of the vehicle restrict their
range. In order to compensate for the added weight of
the electrical components, the BMW Group has developed its LifeDrive concept for BMW i series vehicles,
which is firmly committed to the use of lightweight design. In this context, the BMW Group has, for the first
time, achieved an innovative combination comprising
an aluminium chassis and a CFRP passenger compartment. Specifically deployed, the material used helps reduce total vehicle weight, optimises its point of gravity
and increases the stability of the car’s body. The BMW
Group is currently working on further possible applications, such as hybrid wheel rims comprising a mixture
of aluminium and CFRP. In the case of the BMW M3
and M4 models, the high rigidity and low weight of CFRP
allows the cardan shaft to be manufactured as a single
piece, without a centre bearing. In addition to achieving
a 40% weight-saving compared to the previous model,
a further benefit is that the rotating mass is reduced,
thus resulting in a further improvement in response behaviour. After more than ten years of intensive research
work and the continual optimisation of the processes,
materials, systems and tools involved, the BMW Group
is currently the only automotive manufacturer with
the required know-how to utilise CFRP on a large-scale
production basis.
Highly automated driving at the limit
Precise, reliable control of a vehicle when driven at its
dynamic limit is a key aspect of highly automated driving.
Only a system that can safely master all dynamic situations, including those encountered when a vehicle is
driven at its technical limit, will be able to instil trust and
provide sustained and secure relief for the driver in tiring
situations.
The BMW Group has built an innovative, highly automated research prototype, which in 2014 demonstrated
the utmost safety at the vehicle’s dynamic limit, thanks
to perfected control technology. On a closed-off racetrack, the BMW test vehicle additionally underlined the
efficiency of a new generation of control systems, which
can actively intervene in key driving decisions and
at the same time coordinate the electrically controlled
steering with the brake and accelerator. The system
therefore goes one decisive step further than any of its
predecessors. With BMW ActiveAssist, the BMW Group
is playing a pioneering role in implementing safety-related, highly automated systems. Back in October 2009,
in conjunction with the predecessor research project,
BMW Track Trainer, the BMW Group drove a highly automated vehicle through the racing line of the “Nordschleife” at the Nürburgring racetrack, one of the most
demanding circuits in the world. The BMW emergency
stop assistant research project has delivered further
valuable findings. If the driver fails to react, for example
due to a medical emergency such as a heart attack,
this feature can switch to the highly automated mode,
steer the vehicle safely to the roadside and automatically
send an emergency call. Back in 2011, the first BMW
test vehicle was already driven on a multi-lane motorway using the highly automated mode. Meanwhile, with
some 20,000 kilometres of testing behind them, the
development engineers have gathered valuable insights
into the behaviour and handling strategies of their highly
automated vehicles.
Research project “Virtual marketplace of the future”
Location Based Services enable users to receive information on places of interest, services and events in the
surrounding area – anytime and anywhere. Even while
driving, location-based services and other information
can be a useful supplement, either en route or at your
destination. For that reason, BMW ConnectedDrive already offers users a whole range of location-based information. In future, the vehicle will be able to present the
customer with information and items of interest along
the route, tailored to suit the situation and the user’s
individual preferences. The premiere of the latest generation of the optional navigation system “Professional”
in the BMW 2 Series Convertible achieved an even
higher level of convenience and reliability in terms of
route guidance. The system, which was first presented
in 2014, updates its navigation data on a regular basis,
several times per year, assuming a new version of map
data is available. The user is required to pay neither 
40
18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT
18 General Information on the BMW Group
23 Report on Economic Position
23 General and Sector-specific
Environment
26 Overall Assessment by Management
26 Financial and Non-financial
Performance Indicators
29 Review of Operations
 29 Automotive Segment
 35 Motorcycles Segment
 36 Financial Services Segment
 38 Research and Development
 40 Purchasing
 41 Sales and Marketing
 44 Workforce
 45 Sustainability
49 Results of Operations, Financial
Position and Net Assets
61 Comments on Financial Statements
of BMW AG
64 Events after the End of the
Reporting Period
65 Report on Outlook, Risks and
Opportunities
82 Internal Control System and Risk
Management System Relevant for the
Consolidated Financial Reporting Process
83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers
and Explanatory Comments
87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets
licensing fees nor transmission costs. Via the SIM card
built into the car, the new map data are sent to the
vehicle via the mobile network (LTE), without having
to take the longer route via an external data carrier and
manual installation.
Outstanding technology and design
In the most recent competition for the prestigious “International Engine of the Year Award”, the BMW Group
was awarded prizes in two different categories. For the
fourth time now, the 3.0-litre in-line 6-cylinder petrol
engine featuring BMW TwinPower turbo technology was
among the main prizewinners. The engine powers
numerous current BMW models. The 1.6-litre 4-cylinder
turbo engine, which is fitted in models such as the MINI
Cooper S Countryman and the MINI Cooper S Paceman,
was winner in its class for the eighth consecutive time.
The BMW Group won as many as eight prizes at last
year’s “Red Dot Award for Product Design”. The “Red
Dot” went to seven BMW models. Apart from the
BMW i3, which took the “Red Dot: Best of the Best”
award and thus the highest accolade for trendsetting
design, the BMW i8, the 2 Series Coupé, the 3 Series
Gran Turismo, the 4 Series Coupé and Convertible and
the BMW R nineT all received prizes. Furthermore,
the new MINI received an “Honourable Mention”. With
the “iF product design award”, the BMW i8 was presented with a prize by Industrie Forum Design e. V. for
its innovative design. The greatest appreciation, however, was accorded to the BMW i3, which won the “iF
product design award Gold”. Further awards went to
the X5, the 2 Series Coupé, the 4 Series Coupé, the 3 Series Gran Turismo and the BMW R nineT in the category “Product, transportation design / special vehicles”.
The primary focus of the BMW Group’s purchasing and
logistics activities is to achieve an optimal balance of
quality, innovation, flexible supply structures and competitive cost. In this context, we therefore go to great
lengths to design the supply chain with our business
partners, thus ensuring that we can react rapidly and
flexibly at all times to fluctuations in order volumes, even
within a volatile environment.
Numerous model start-ups
2014 saw the start-up of 13 new BMW and MINI brand
models. Most of the BMW start-ups were concentrated
on Europe and the NAFTA region. The production start
of the new X4 at the Spartanburg plant resulted in a
broader supplier base within the NAFTA region. Close
collaboration with external business partners and the
BMW Group’s own in-house component production
team resulted in the introduction of numerous innovations, many of them relating to the BMW i8.
Increasing importance of NAFTA region
During the year under report, the construction of a new
plant in San Luis Potosí (Mexico) with a planned annual
manufacturing capacity of 150,000 units was announced.
This move is in line with the strategy of ensuring globally balanced growth. For the BMW Group, it will also
entail a further increase in NAFTA-based purchases in
the coming years, whilst at the same time contributing
to currency hedging. In view of these developments,
the BMW Group’s decentralised organisational structures in the NAFTA region have been strengthened and
newly aligned.High level of investment safeguards productivity
and technology lead
The Purchasing and Supplier Network is also responsible
for component production throughout the BMW Group.
The importance of the Landshut plant as a competence
centre for lightweight construction was underlined by
the expansion of CFRP production facilities at the site.
The Landshut plant also serves as a centre for electromobility-related components, including, for instance,
production of the electric motors and engine transmission
units for the BMW i3 and i8. Important chassis and
drive components for the BMW i models are produced
at the Dingolfing plant.tart-up of Rolls-Royce Ghost Series II
The Rolls-Royce Ghost Series II has been in the showrooms since the autumn with a moderately revised
design and continues to combine smooth, understated
performance with contemporary luxury.
In 2014, Rolls-Royce Motor Cars added ten dealerships
to its sales network, an important step in its aspiration
to strengthen its position in the ultra-luxury segment.
New approach to communications with #BMWstories
BMW is breaking new ground in communications
with #BMWstories. The online platform www.bmw.
com / BMWstories offers a broad spectrum of communication channels. These include films and photo galleries depicting the special features of BMW models.
Since #BMWstories started in May 2014, the online
platform has received more than 3.5 million hits. Over
200 million interactions have already taken place in
social media. The published videos have been viewed
over 36 million times.
Successful launch of BMW i 360°ELECTRIC
With BMW i 360°ELECTRIC, BMW currently offers a
comprehensive package of products and services for
purely battery-powered and plug-in hybrid vehicles in
38 countries worldwide. The package is based on four
features: comfortable, rapid, emissions-free charging at
home; simple comprehensive access to public charging
stations; flexible mobility for long-distance journeys
and an Assistance Service for maintenance and repairs.
BMW offers two types of product for charging at home:
in addition to the Wallbox Pure for simple, safe charging,
the Wallbox Pro has been available since 2014 for more
rapid availability.
Development of connected mobility
The BMW Group further extended its connected mobility services in 2014. In total, BMW ConnectedDrive services were introduced in a further eleven markets, as a
result of which they are now available in 36 countries worldwide. In the meantime, 95% of all new vehicles in
the BMW fleet are equipped with an integrated SIM
card.
In addition to its intelligent emergency call feature,
which already offers a broader range of functions than
the E-call required by EU legislation as from 2016, the
customer can benefit from a large number of innovative services. These include the Concierge Call, which
is available around the clock and – if required – looks
up addresses and feeds them directly into the navigation system or makes reservations directly. In addition, the real-time traffic information (RTTI) or the remote functions, for example, offer useful support for
the driver.
In addition, further distribution channels have been
established for mobility services. During the year under
report, the ConnectedDrive Store opened not only in
the pilot markets of Belgium and Luxembourg, but also
in Germany. For the first time in the premium segment,
services can therefore be ordered quickly and easily via
a PC or even directly from the vehicle, and used straight
away. The ConnectedDrive Store therefore grants access not only to new vehicles but also to used vehicles
equipped with ConnectedDrive.
BMW i sales model
To coincide with the market launch of the BMW i3 in
Europe and Japan, a direct sales model was successfully
introduced in these markets. Over 200 selected BMW i
partners offer BMW i brand vehicles. In addition, the
BMW i models are available in selected direct sales markets via new distribution channels – including via the
Customer Interaction Centre (CIC), which has been successfully introduced in nine markets. In four markets
to start with, the Mobile Sales Advisor (MSA) has also
become a fixed component of the BMW i sales model.
The integrated BMW i online sales platform enables customers to order their BMW i3 via the Internet, too. The
new sales channels provide customer-friendly access to
the BMW i range of products and services. In the showrooms, the Product Genius in operation at all BMW i
partners also contributes to comprehensive product
advice.
Premium services for individual mobility
Beyond its innovative electric and hybrid cars, BMW i
also stands for sustainable mobility concepts. The aim
of the mobility services is to promote urban mobility,
irrespective of the means of transport used.
43 Combined Management Report
DriveNow, the car-sharing service offered by BMW i,
MINI and Sixt, enables users to rent BMW and MINI
vehicles according to their needs. Via an app, the website or directly on the road, it is a simple matter for users
to find, book and park the cars again in another part
of the city. The DriveNow service is currently available
in Munich, Berlin, Düsseldorf, Hamburg, Cologne, San
Francisco, Vienna and, since December 2014, in London,
too. The fleet currently consists of about 2,800 cars. At
the end of 2014, over 390,000 customers had benefited
from the premium car-sharing service. Under the brand
name AlphaCity, we also offer a car-sharing scheme
for businesses. Up to November 2014, 10,000 registered
employees had used the AlphaCity service.
ParkNow is an app- and Web-based service, which helps
resolve parking problems for users. On the one hand,
parking spaces are available to customers in partner car
parks which can be booked online. On the other hand,
the service makes it easier to find roadside parking spots.
ChargeNow is the BMW i mobility service that simplifies finding and using public charging stations run by
various suppliers belonging to an international network. In 2014, a large proportion of BMW i customers
opted for this service. ChargeNow currently has over
24,000 charging points at its disposal in 19 markets.
BMW i Ventures was founded back in 2011 to ensure
optimum conditions for the use and promotion of innovative mobility services. Based in New York, BMW i
Ventures facilitates access to new technologies and opens
up new customer groups, thereby reinforcing the strategic approach adopted by BMW i. Life360, MyCityWay,
JustPark, ChargePoint and ChargeMaster are examples
of some of BMW i Ventures’ strategic investments.
Customer services remain on track in 2014
In 2014, sales of BMW and MINI spare parts, accessories
and services were well up on the previous year’s level,
with the major markets in the USA, Germany and China
making a decisive contribution to this performance.
Growth was also registered in many other markets, such
as Russia, Korea and South Africa. The dynamic growth
in business goes hand in hand with investments in the
future logistics network and with many other measures
aimed at boosting customer satisfaction.
New premium experience in showrooms
By 2017, the Future Retail programme will be implemented worldwide with a view to enhancing the premium experience of our brands and products.Sustainable management
Sustainability for the BMW Group means making a
lasting positive contribution to economic success, thus
creating added value for the business. Manufacturing
with efficient and resource-friendly production processes and offering customers state-of-the-art solutions
for sustainable individual mobility gives the BMW
Group a competitive advantage. Our employees play a
vital role in this context with their personal commitment and ideas, a fact borne out, for example, by the
€ 31 million saved in 2014 alone in conjunction with
the ideas management system in place throughout the
BMW Group. Our commitment to sustainable management and our aspiration for social responsibility along
the entire value chain are firmly embedded within the
BMW Group.
As well as requiring social and ecological aspects to be
taken into account in internal decision-making processes, the BMW Group’s sustainability management
system involves the systematic analysis of external factors and a continual dialogue with our stakeholders.
Materiality process
Global megatrends such as urbanisation or climate
change have an impact on both regulatory conditions
and customer requirements, causing new fields of
business to arise. In order to recognise any such
changes in good time, we regularly perform a review
using our materiality process. In this context, we analyse the importance of challenges on society, both from
the point of view of different stakeholder groups and
from an internal BMW Group perspective. The results
of the materiality analysis – shown in the materiality
matrix – form the basis for our regular verification of
the direction our sustainability strategy is taking.
Sustainability ratings
In 2014 the BMW Group was able to maintain its position as most sustainable premium manufacturer in the
automotive industry and again secured excellent placings in widely regarded ratings. In the Dow Jones Sustainability Indices (DJSI), for instance, the BMW Group
took first place in the Automobiles sector. The BMW
Group is therefore the only enterprise in this sector to
have been listed in the index without interruption since
its inception. In the Global 500 rating of the Carbon
Disclosure Project (CDP), we again achieved 100 out of
a possible 100 points for transparent reporting and the
best mark for climate protection measures, thus retaining
our leading position again in 2014. Based on this result,
the BMW Group is listed with the highest performance
score “A” in the global Climate Performance Leadership Clean production
The BMW Group improves resource efficiency by integrating environmental management in all of its production processes. Since 2006 we have reduced both the
volume of resources utilised and the emissions per vehicle produced by an average of 45.0%.*The BMW Group again reduced the energy consumption per vehicle produced by 4.7% to 2.25 MWh during
the period under report. One of the measures that contributed towards the efficiency improvement was the
utilisation of intelligent energy data management. It is a
component of the BMW Group’s “Industrie 4.0” production concept and based on intelligent electricity meters that continually measure the energy consumption
levels of production facilities and robots and compare
them with a centralised corporate network for the purpose of detecting and avoiding, at the earliest possible
stage, any deviations that lead to excessive electricity
consumption.
The utilisation of highly efficient, ecologically sustainable combined heat and power plants (CHPs) and the
use of electricity generated from renewable sources at
our production sites, as well as improved energy efficiency measures, enabled us to reduce CO2 emissions
per vehicle produced by a further 2.9% year-on-year to
0.66 tonnes during the period under report.
At 2.18 m³ per vehicle produced, water consumption
was maintained at a stable low level. At 0.47 m³ the same
applies to the volume of process wastewater generated
per vehicle produced.
The volume of non-recyclable production waste was
further reduced to 4.93 kg per vehicle produced in 2014,
an improvement of 14.0%. A number of measures contributed towards this development, one of which was
an additional improvement in the treatment of washing water used in the production of passenger car brake
discs at the Berlin plant.
Solvent emissions were sharply curtailed by 18.9%
to 1.29 kg per vehicle produced during 2014, which is
mainly due to the fact that in the Chinese plant in
Dadong*
 the retrofitting of the paint shop with an exhaust air cleaning system was reflected in full-year
statistics for the first time.
*
 Joint venture BMW Brilliance Automotive Ltd., Shenyang.
Sustainability along the entire value chain
Sustainability criteria also play a major role in the selection and assessment of our suppliers as well as in the
field of transport logistics. The active management of
sustainability risks along the supplier chain reduces compliance and image risks. With this in mind, the BMW
Group has integrated a comprehensive system of sustainability management in its purchasing processes.
The amount of energy needed for transportation worldwide has risen considerably in recent years. In order to
keep CO2 emissions to an absolute minimum, we adhere
to the principle “production follows the market”. Moreover, we are continually increasing the percentage of
low-carbon modes of transport we use. In total, 63.3%
of all new vehicles left our plants by rail during the twelvemonth period under report (2013: 60.7%).
Fleet CO2 emissions again reduced
For many years now, the use of our Efficient Dynamics
technologies in series production has enabled us to
continually reduce the CO2 emissions generated by our
vehicles. Again in 2014, further progress was made in
the electrification of our fleet with the introduction of
the BMW i8 plug-in hybrid sports car and the launching
of the BMW i3 in additional key markets. These measures form the basis for complying with legally stipulated
CO2 and fuel consumption limits going into the future.The current high level of volatility prevailing in many
economies continues to have an unsettling impact on
markets and consumers. Many emerging economies are
currently performing below their full potential. The
eurozone is still having to cope with a range of structural
problems, such as those evident in Greece.
The slowing of economic growth in China, one of the
BMW Group’s principal markets, also continues to pose
a major risk. Upheavals in the property or banking sector
in this region could result in reduced demand for our
products and services.
Any escalation of political conflicts (such as in Russia),
terrorist activities, natural disasters or possible pandemics could have a negative impact on the world economy and international capital markets. The BMW Group
counters these risks primarily by internationalising its
sales and production structures, in order to reduce the
potential impact of risk exposures in individual countries. Political and global economic risks are determined
by analysing historical data and applying a cash-flow-atrisk approach.
If risks from this category were to materialise, they
could – due to sales volume fluctuations – have a high
impact on results of operations over the two-year assessment period. Overall, the risk amounts attached
to political and global economic risks are classified as
high.
Political and global economic opportunities
Despite the high level of risk involved, the BMW Group
sees an opportunity for above-average growth in the
Chinese market. In addition to the impact from economic developments, the BMW Group’s earnings can
also be positively affected in the short to medium term
by changes in the legal environment. A possible reduction in tariff barriers, import restrictions or direct excise duties could lower the cost of materials for the
BMW Group, also enabling products and services to be
offered to customers at lower prices. Another factor to
consider is that regulatory support for forward-looking
technologies, such as electromobility, help to make
the total cost of ownership more attractive for customers
in the form of incentives. Developments of this kind
open up opportunities to achieve faster market penetration for these technologies, which could, in turn, lead
to higher sales volumes and, all other things being equal,
result in an improved quality of earnings. Changes in
the legal environment are monitored continuously at a
centralised level. At present, however, the BMW Group
does not see any significant political and / or global economic opportunities, which could have a positive sustainable impact on its earnings performance.
Strategic and sector risks and opportunities
New regulations and the development of fuel and energy
prices also influence various aspects of our business,
including customer behaviour. Medium- and long-term
targets have already been put in place in Europe, North
America, Japan, China and other countries to minimise
fuel consumption and CO2 emissions.
Strategic and sector risks
One of the main risks for the automobile industry is
the possible threat of short-term tightening of laws and
regulations, including local registration restrictions. In
some cases, changes in customer behaviour are not only
brought on by new regulations, but also through changes
of opinion, values and environmental issues. Among
other factors, global climate change is having an effect
on legislation, regulations and consumer behaviour. In
order to meet structural changes in the demand for
individual mobility that no longer necessarily entail
actually owning a vehicle, the BMW Group is offering
corresponding mobility services, such as the DriveNow
car-sharing model.
With its Efficient Dynamics concept, the BMW Group
is playing a pioneering role in the premium segment in
reducing both fuel consumption and emissions. With
effect from 2013, our range of products was expanded
to include electric powertrains in BMW i series vehicles.
These innovations also make an important contribution
in our endeavours to fulfil statutory rules and requirements in terms of CO2 emissions. The BMW Group is
investing in the development of sustainable drive technologies and materials, with the aim of providing highly
efficient vehicles for individual mobility in the premium
segment, both now and in the future.
Employees make a vital contribution to sustainable
growth and improved profitability through their innovative skills. One prerequisite for this is a consistent
strategic approach to the management of human resources, even in the event of changes in the legal framework. The BMW Group has appropriate measures in 
74
18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT
18 General Information on the BMW Group
18 Business Model
20 Management System
23 Report on Economic Position
23 General and Sector-specific
Environment
26 Overall Assessment by Management
26 Financial and Non-financial
Performance Indicators
29 Review of Operations
49 Results of Operations, Financial
Position and Net Assets
61 Comments on Financial Statements
of BMW AG
64 Events after the End of the
Reporting Period
65 Report on Outlook, Risks and
Opportunities
65 Outlook
70 Report on Risks and Opportunities
82 Internal Control System and Risk
Management System Relevant for the
Consolidated Financial Reporting Process
83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers
and Explanatory Comments
87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets
place for such eventualities. Risk amounts and earnings
impact are measured on the basis of extensive scenario
analyses.
If risks from the strategic and sector category were to
materialise, they could have a medium impact on results
of operations over the two-year assessment period. The
amounts of risk attached to strategic and sector-specific
risks are classified as medium.
Strategic and sector opportunities
Additions to the product and mobility portfolio and
expansion in growth regions are seen as the most important opportunities for growth in the medium to
long term for the BMW Group.
Remaining on growth course depends above all else on
the ability to develop innovative products and bring
them to market. The launching of the BMW i brand opens
up new customer target groups for the BMW Group and
consolidates the position of BMW as a sustainable and
forward-looking brand. BMW i products can be seen as
“empowerment projects” for new technologies and processes, which will also benefit other vehicle concepts.
The existing product portfolio has been expanded by the
addition of mobility services such as DriveNow, ChargeNow and ParkNow. The general acceptance of, and
sales volumes generated with, planned future product
innovations could be better than predicted in the outlook. In the short term, however, any potential positive
impact is classified as not material.
The long-term trend towards greater sustainability provides opportunities to boost sales of sustainable products and, under the right circumstances, achieve better
selling prices. Innovations – such as the BMW i3 and i8
in the field of electromobility or Efficient Dynamics
across the entire BMW Group product portfolio – provide excellent platforms for future growth. Potential
is also seen by engaging in new product and market
categories and by developing new customer target
groups. New business models and cooperation arrangements with the BMW Group’s growing network of
business partners often provide the best means to take
advantage of these opportunities. Good examples of
this are the implementation of the 360°ELECTRIC portfolio in the field of electromobility, the partnership with
SIXT in the field of mobility services and collaboration
with Toyota on a hydrogen fuel cell system.
The BMW Group is constantly refining the tools it uses
to recruit employees, encourage career development and
bind employees to the enterprise. Within this environment, employees find the optimal situation in which to
develop their skills. If these measures generate greater
benefits than currently expected, the BMW Group’s revenues, results of operations and cash flows could be
positively impacted and forecasted figures surpassed.
Creating a successful performance culture and the development of the expertise and skill sets of both staff and
managers alike throughout the organisation could also
have a positive impact on revenue and profitability.
Given the long lead times involved, the BMW Group’s
earnings performance is unlikely to benefit over the assessment period from efficiency improvements or from
the implementation of product and process developments
to a significantly greater extent than that already incorporated in the outlook.
Risks and opportunities relating to operations
Production and technology-related risks
Production stoppages and downtimes – in particular
due to fire, but also those attributable to manufacturing
equipment breakdowns, logistical disruptions or new
vehicle production line start-ups – represent risks which
the BMW Group counters with a broad range of appropriate measures. Production structures and processes
are designed from the outset with a view to reducing
potential damage and the probability of occurrence. In
addition to technical fire protection measures, the BMW
Group has implemented an array of strategies, including
preventative maintenance, land development measures
including contingencies against flooding, spare parts
management on a multi-site basis and backup plans
for alternative transportation. The level of risk is also
reduced by the deployment of flexible work-schedule
models and employee time accounts, but also by the
ability to build specific models at additional sites if
necessary. Moreover, risks arising from business interruption and loss of production as a consequence of fire
are also insured up to economically reasonable levels
with insurance companies of good credit standing.
If risks from the production and technology-related risks
category were to materialise, they could have a high impact on the results of operations over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to prouction
and technology-related issues is classified as medium.
75 Combined Management Report
Production and technology-related opportunities
In addition to the risks involved, we firmly believe that
the choice of sites for new production facilities also
creates a wealth of opportunities. Selecting a new location goes hand in glove with the opportunity to shape
the local environment in a positive way (e. g. job creation, training, corporate social responsibility (CSR) projects). Our aim is to continue our commitment to sustainability whenever a new site is selected. We therefore
endeavour to incorporate flagship projects at our production sites that have a clear focus on sustainability
(e. g. wind turbines in Leipzig). The option of offsetting
capacities between BMW Group sites is always kept in
mind if production technologies can be employed to
achieve greater efficiency in the use of resources.
Compared to the outlook, efficiency improvements are
unlikely to have a significantly greater impact over
the two-year assessment period than that already incorporated in the outlook.
Purchasing risks
Close cooperation between carmakers and automotive
suppliers creates economic benefits on the one hand,
but also raises levels of dependency on the other. The
increasing trend towards modular-based production
with a set of common architectures covering various
models and product lines exacerbates the consequences
of the loss of a supplier or failure to supply on time.
As part of the supplier preselection process, the BMW
Group is careful to ensure that its future business partners meet the same high ecological, social and corporate governance standards by which the BMW Group is
generally measured. Suppliers are assessed on the basis
of the BMW Group Sustainability Standard, which is
applied throughout our supplier network worldwide.
This set of fundamental principles and standards covers
both production and non-production aspects relevant
for the goods and services provided by suppliers, which
also includes compliance with internationally recognised
human rights and applicable labour and social standards. The principal tool for ensuring compliance with
the BMW Group Sustainability Standard is a threestage sustainability and risk management approach comprising a BMW Group-specific sustainability risk filter,
a sustainability questionnaire and a sustainability audit.
In addition, the technical and financial capabilities of
suppliers – especially those supplying for modular-based
production – are continuously monitored during both
the development and production phases of the Group’s
vehicles. Particular attention is paid to the quality of the
parts. In order to attain the level of quality required, it
may become necessary to invest in new technological
concepts or discontinue planned innovations, with the
consequence that the cost of materials could exceed
levels incorporated in the outlook. Supplier sites are assessed for exposure to natural hazards, such as floods
or earthquakes, in order to identify supply risks at an
early stage and implement appropriate countermeasures.
Production problems incurred by suppliers could have
adverse consequences for the BMW Group, ranging
from increased expenditure through to production interruptions and a corresponding reduction in sales
volume.
Raw materials management procedures are in place to
mitigate the risk of a production interruption due to
shortages of supplies of critical raw materials. In order
to reduce supply risks, the BMW Group works hard
to reduce the input of raw materials or to use alternative
raw materials as a substitute.
If purchasing risks were to materialise, they could have
a high impact on the BMW Group’s results of operations over the two-year assessment period. The level
of risk attached to supply risks is classified as high,
mainly due to the insufficient availability of raw materials
in Asia.
Risks relating to sales and marketing
Changes in global economic conditions and increasingly
protectionist trends are among the factors that could
result in lower demand as well as fluctuations in the regional spread and composition of sales in terms of vehicles and mobility services. Risks relating to these
developments can be reduced with the aid of flexible
selling and production processes. At the same time, increased pressure on selling prices and margins caused
by intense competition on the world’s markets, particularly in Western Europe, the USA and China, requires
constant analysis, including keeping an eye on developments in grey market volumes from the USA to China.
Selling price and margin risks are determined on the
basis of past experience and changing global economic
conditions, with risk exposures measured using a cashflow-at-risk model.
If sales and marketing risks were to materialise, they
could have a high impact on the BMW Group’s results
of operations over the two-year assessment period. The
level of risk attached to sales and marketing risks is
classified as high.
76
18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT
18 General Information on the BMW Group
18 Business Model
20 Management System
23 Report on Economic Position
23 General and Sector-specific
Environment
26 Overall Assessment by Management
26 Financial and Non-financial
Performance Indicators
29 Review of Operations
49 Results of Operations, Financial
Position and Net Assets
61 Comments on Financial Statements
of BMW AG
64 Events after the End of the
Reporting Period
65 Report on Outlook, Risks and
Opportunities
65 Outlook
70 Report on Risks and Opportunities
82 Internal Control System and Risk
Management System Relevant for the
Consolidated Financial Reporting Process
83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers
and Explanatory Comments
87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets
Opportunities relating to sales and marketing
Opportunities may arise due to other technical innovations relating to products and processes and as a result
of organisational changes. In the field of lightweight
construction, for example, carbon was being put to use
in high volumes for the first time in the automobile industry in the construction of the BMW i3.
Since carbon could also be used in other vehicle projects,
we see further competitive advantages in terms of fuel
consumption and driving dynamics, which could, in
turn, have a positive impact on sales volume growth. The
opportunities will not have a material impact over the
assessment period on the results of operations of the
BMW Group.
The BMW Group focuses its selling capacities primarily
on markets with the greatest sales volume and revenue
potential and fastest growth rates. Investment in existing
and new marketing concepts is firmly aimed at intensifying relationships with customers. A good example is
the new marketing concept for BMW i products and
services, which will be offered in selected markets in the
future via an innovative multi-channel model. There
will be no relaxing of efforts in the active search for new
opportunities to create even greater added value for
customers than currently expected, whilst at the same
time looking for ways to boost sales volumes and achieve
better selling prices. Developments in the field of digital communication and networking are also opening
up opportunities for marketing the BMW Group’s
various brands. Consumers can meanwhile be reached
on a more targeted and individual basis, thus helping to
strengthen long-term relationships and brand loyalty.
The BMW Group keeps track of the latest developments
and trends in communication technology, including
the use of social media and networks, in order to extend
customer reach for its brands. Automotive-related business activities of technology companies are also closely
followed (autonomous driving). The BMW Group’s
brands are present on numerous platforms, such as
Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. Thanks to its intensive
efforts in this area, the BMW Group is registering faster
growth rates on the various platforms than its competitors, measured in terms of the number of fans and
visits. The decisive advantage of digital communication
is that the brands are able to engage in a direct dialogue with customers and thus create a more intense
product and brand experience.
The BMW Group considers that these opportunities will
not have a material impact on the results of operations
over the two-year assessment period compared to the
assumptions made in the outlook.
Risks relating to pension obligations
The BMW Group’s pension obligations to its employees
resulting from defined benefit plans are measured on
the basis of actuarial reports. Future pension payments
are discounted by reference to market yields on highquality corporate bonds. These yields are subject to market fluctuation and therefore influence the level of pension obligations. Changes in other parameters, such as
rises in inflation and longer life expectancy, also impact
pension obligations and payments. Opportunities and
risks arise depending on the nature and scale of changes
in these parameters.
Most of the BMW Group’s pension obligations are administered in external pension funds or trust arrangements and the related assets are kept separate from Company assets. The amount of funds required to finance
pension payments out of operations in the future is
therefore substantially reduced, since most of the Group’s
pension obligations are settled out of pension fund assets. The pension assets of the BMW Group comprise
interest-bearing securities, equities, real estate and other
investment classes. Pension fund assets are monitored
continuously and managed on a risk-and-yield basis.
A broad spread of investments also helps to reduce risk.
In order to reduce fluctuations in pension funding
shortfalls, investments are structured to coincide with
the timing of pension payments and the expected pattern of pension obligations. Remeasurements on the
obligations and fund asset sides are recognised, net of
deferred taxes, in “Other comprehensive income” and
hence directly in equity (within revenue reserves).
If risks relating to pension obligations were to materialise, they could have a high impact on the BMW
Group’s results of operations over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to risks relating
to pension obligations is classified as high.
Opportunities relating to pension obligations
Within a favourable capital market environment, the
return generated by pension assets may exceed expectations and reduce the deficit of the relevant pension
plans. This, in turn, could have a materially favourable 
77 Combined Management Report
impact on the net assets position and earnings performance of the BMW Group.
Further information on risks in conjunction with pension provisions is provided in note 36 to the Group
Financial Statements.
Information, data protection and IT risks
The importance of electronically processed data continues to rise, with information technology (IT) playing
an increasingly crucial role in every aspect of the
business. These developments create opportunities on
the one hand, whilst also posing a source of risk on the
other.
The BMW Group could incur damage if the confidentiality, integrity and / or availability of sensitive information and data are not maintained. Great importance is
attached to the protection of business information and
of employee and customer data against unauthorised
access and / or misuse. Data security, based on International Security Standard ISO / IEC 27001, is an integral
component of all business processes. Personal data is
protected in accordance with the stringent requirements
of the EU Data Protection Directive and the Federal
Data Protection Act (Bundesdatenschutzgesetz – BDSG).
All employees are required to treat confidential information (such as customer and employee data) in an appropriate manner, ensure that information systems are
properly used and that risks are handled with the utmost transparency. Uniform requirements, documented
in a coordinated and comprehensive set of principles,
guidelines and work instructions, are applicable groupwide. Regular communication and sensitisation-raising activities create a high degree of security and risk
awareness among the employees involved. Employees
receive training to ensure compliance with applicable
requirements and in-house rules.
Risk management procedures include systematic documentation of all information / data protection and IT
risks, regular monitoring and the implementation of
appropriate measures by the departments responsible.
Technical data protection procedures include virus scanners, firewall systems, access controls at both operating
system and application level, regular data backups and
data encryption. Regular analyses and controls (including the testing of data protection requirements) and
rigorous security management ensure a high level of
security.
Responsibility for data protection in each Group entity
lies with the Board of Management (of BMWAG) or
the relevant company management team. Local Data
Privacy Protection Officers are embedded in each of the
Group’s entities. In the case of cooperation arrangements and business partner relationships, the BMW
Group protects its intellectual property as well as customer and employee data by stipulating clear instructions with regard to data protection and the use of
information technology. Information pertaining to key
areas of expertise as well as sensitive personal data
are subject to particularly stringent security measures.
In a clear signal to employees, customers and Europe’s
data protection authorities that data protection is taken
very seriously, the Board of Management of BMWAG
resolved a set of Binding Corporate Rules (BCR) that
ensure the secure transfer of personal data throughout
the BMW Group’s global organisation. The BMW Group
has become the first car manufacturer worldwide to
successfully complete the relevant BCR recognition procedures.
The requirements placed on IT facilities – both externally
and internally – are changing at a breathtaking pace in
the face of technological developments. Potential risks
are therefore investigated continuously and appropriate
measures put in place to prevent or minimise their impact. Despite regular testing and the whole gamut of
preventative security measures employed, it is nevertheless impossible to rule out risks completely in this area.
If information, data protection and IT risks were to materialise, they are only likely to result in a minor impact
on the results of operations over the two-year assessment period. The levels of risk attached to information,
data protection and IT risks are classified as medium.
Information, data protection and IT opportunities
Conversely, the deployment of information technology
also opens up many opportunities. New approaches
to production and energy supply systems that are currently being investigated in the context of “Industrie
4.0” are generating significant efficiency improvements
and resulting in greater sustainability. The range of 
78
18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT
18 General Information on the BMW Group
18 Business Model
20 Management System
23 Report on Economic Position
23 General and Sector-specific
Environment
26 Overall Assessment by Management
26 Financial and Non-financial
Performance Indicators
29 Review of Operations
49 Results of Operations, Financial
Position and Net Assets
61 Comments on Financial Statements
of BMW AG
64 Events after the End of the
Reporting Period
65 Report on Outlook, Risks and
Opportunities
65 Outlook
70 Report on Risks and Opportunities
82 Internal Control System and Risk
Management System Relevant for the
Consolidated Financial Reporting Process
83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers
and Explanatory Comments
87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets
services and apps on offer to customers through BMW
ConnectedDrive is constantly being expanded and updated.
The opportunities arising from the deployment of information technology are not expected to have a material
positive impact during the two-year assessment period
compared to the assumptions made in the outlook.
Financial risks and opportunities
Currency risks and opportunities
As an internationally operating enterprise, the BMW
Group conducts business in a variety of currencies, thus
giving rise to currency risks and opportunities. Since a
substantial portion of Group revenues is generated outside the eurozone (particularly in China and the USA)
and the procurement of production material and funding
is also organised on a worldwide basis, fluctuations in
exchange rates can play a significant role for Group
earnings. Cash-flow-at-risk models and scenario analyses
are used to measure currency risks and opportunities.
Operational currency management is based on the results
provided by these tools. In 2014 the Chinese renminbi,
the US dollar, the British pound, the Russian rouble and
the Japanese yen constituted approximately 75% of the
total foreign currency exposure of the BMW Group, with
the Chinese renminbi and the US dollar accounting for
the lion’s share of foreign currency transactions. The
BMW Group manages currency risks at both strategic
(medium and long term) and operating level (short
and medium term). Medium- and long-term measures
include increasing production volumes in non-euroregion countries (natural hedging) and increasing purchase volumes denominated in foreign currencies.
Constructing new plants in countries such as the USA,
China or Brazil have also helped reduce foreign currency exposures. Currency risks are managed in the
short to medium term and for operational purposes by
means of hedging. Hedging transactions are entered
into only with financial partners of good credit standing.
Opportunities are also secured through the deployment
of options. A description of the methods applied for
risk measurement and hedging is provided in note 43
to the Group Financial Statements. Counterparty risk
management procedures are carried out continuously
in order to monitor the creditworthiness of business
partners.
If currency risks were to materialise, they could have a
high impact on the BMW Group’s results of operations
over the two-year assessment period. A high level of
risk is attached to currency risks. Significant opportunities can arise if currency developments are favourable
for the BMW Group.
If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group are accounted for as
hedging relationships. Further information on risks in
conjunction with financial instruments is provided in
note 43 to the Group Financial Statements.
Risks and opportunities relating to raw materials
Changes in prices of raw materials are monitored on the
basis of a set of well-defined management procedures.
The principal objective of these management processes
is to increase planning reliability for the BMW Group.
Price risks and opportunities relating to precious metals
(platinum, palladium, rhodium) and non-ferrous metals
(aluminium, copper, lead), and, to some extent, to steel
and steel ingredients (iron ore, coking coal) and energy
(gas, electricity) are hedged using financial derivatives
and / or supply contracts with fixed pricing arrangements.
A description of the methods applied for risk measurement and hedging is provided in note 43 to the Group
Financial Statements.
If risks relating to raw materials were to materialise,
they could have a medium impact on the BMW Group’s
results of operations over the two-year assessment
period. A high level of risk is attached to risks relating
to raw materials.
Conversely, significant opportunities can arise if prices
of raw materials develop favourably for the BMW Group.
If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group are accounted for as
hedging relationships. Further information on risks in
conjunction with financial instruments is provided in
note 43 to the Group Financial Statements.
Liquidity risks
Based on experience gained during the financial crisis,
a minimum liquidity concept has been developed and
is rigorously adhered to. Solvency is assured at all times
throughout the BMW Group by maintaining a liquidity
reserve and by the broad diversification of refinancing
sources. The liquidity position is monitored continuously at a separate entity level and managed by means 
79 Combined Management Report
of cash flow requirements and sourcing forecast system in place throughout the Group. Liquidity risks may
be reflected in rising refinancing costs. They may also
manifest themselves in restricted access to funds as a
consequence of the general market situation or the default of individual banks. The major part of the Financial Services segment’s credit financing and lease business is refinanced on capital markets. Thanks to its
excellent creditworthiness, the BMW Group has good
access to financial markets and, as in previous years,
was able to raise funds at good conditions in 2014, reflecting a diversified refinancing strategy and the solid
liquidity and earnings base of the BMW Group. Internationally recognised rating agencies have additionally
confirmed the BMW Group’s solid creditworthiness.
If liquidity risks were to materialise, they are only likely
to result in a low impact on the BMW Group’s results
of operations over the two-year assessment period.
The risk of incurring liquidity risk is classified as low –
including the risk of the BMW Group’s rating being
downgraded and any ensuing deterioration in financing
conditions.
If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group are accounted for as
hedging relationships. Further information on risks in
conjunction with financial instruments is provided in
note 43 to the Group Financial Statements.
Risks and opportunities relating to Financial Services
The categories of risk relating to the provision of financial services are credit and counterparty risk, residual
value risk, interest rate risk, liquidity risk and operational risk. In order to evaluate and manage these risks,
a variety of internal methods has been developed
based on regulatory environment requirements (such
as Basel III) and which comply with both national and
international standards. A set of strategic principles
and rules derived from regulatory requirements serves
as the basis for risk management within the Financial
Services segment. At the heart of the risk management
process is a clear division between front- and back-office activities and a comprehensive internal control system. The key risk management tool employed within
the Financial Services segment is aimed at ensuring
that the Group’s risk-bearing capacity is not exceeded.
In this context, all risks (defined as “unexpected losses”)
must be covered at all times by an appropriate asset
cushion in the form of equity capital. Unexpected losses
are measured using a variety of value-at-risk techniques,
adapted to each relevant risk category. Risks are aggregated after taking account of correlation effects. The
total amount of risks calculated in this way is then compared with the resources available to cover risks (asset
cushion). The segment’s risk-bearing capacity is monitored continuously with the aid of an integrated limit
system which also differentiates between the various risk
categories. The segment’s total risk exposure was
covered at all times during the past year by the available
risk-coverage volumes.
Credit and counterparty risks and opportunities
Credit and counterparty default risk arises within the
Financial Services segment if a contractual partner (i. e.
a customer or dealer) either becomes unable or is only
partially able to fulfil its contractual obligations, such
that lower income is generated or losses incurred. The
Financial Services segment uses a variety of rating
systems in order to assess the creditworthiness of its
contractual partners. Credit risks are managed at the
time of the initial credit decision on the basis of a calculation of the present value of standard risk costs and
subsequently, during the term of the credit, by using a
range of risk provisioning techniques to cover risks
emanating from changes in customer creditworthiness.
In this context, individual customers are classified by
category each month on the basis of their current contractual status, and appropriate levels of allowance
recognised in accordance with that classification. If
economies develop more favourably than assumed in
the outlook, there is a chance that credit losses may be
reduced and earnings improved accordingly.
If credit and counterparty risks were to materialise, they
could have a medium impact on the BMW Group’s
results of operations over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to credit and counterparty risks is classified as high. The BMW Group classifies potential opportunities in this area as material.
Residual value risks and opportunities
Risks and opportunities arise at the end of the contractual term of a lease if the market value of the leased vehicle differs from the residual value calculated at the inception of the lease and factored into the lease payments.
80
18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT
18 General Information on the BMW Group
18 Business Model
20 Management System
23 Report on Economic Position
23 General and Sector-specific
Environment
26 Overall Assessment by Management
26 Financial and Non-financial
Performance Indicators
29 Review of Operations
49 Results of Operations, Financial
Position and Net Assets
61 Comments on Financial Statements
of BMW AG
64 Events after the End of the
Reporting Period
65 Report on Outlook, Risks and
Opportunities
65 Outlook
70 Report on Risks and Opportunities
82 Internal Control System and Risk
Management System Relevant for the
Consolidated Financial Reporting Process
83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers
and Explanatory Comments
87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets
A residual value risk exists if the expected market value
of the vehicle at the end of the contractual term is lower
than its residual value at the date the contract is entered
into. Each vehicle’s market value is forecast on the basis
of historical external and internal data and used to predict the expected market value of the vehicle at the end
of the contractual period. As part of the process of
managing residual value risks, a calculation is performed
at the inception of each contract to determine the present value of risk costs. Market developments are observed throughout the contractual period and the risk
assessment updated appropriately.
If residual value risks were to materialise, they could have
a high impact on Group earnings over the two-year
assessment period. The impact on the segments affected
would be on a medium scale. The level of risk is classified as high for the Group as a whole. The BMW Group
classifies potential residual value opportunities as
material.
Interest rate risks and opportunities
Interest rate risks in the Financial Services segment relate
to potential losses caused by changes in market interest
rates and can arise when fixed interest rate periods for
assets and liabilities recognised in the balance sheet do
not match. Interest rate risks in the Financial Services
line of business are managed by raising refinancing funds
with matching maturities and by employing interest rate
derivatives.
If interest rate risks were to materialise, they are only
likely to result in a low impact on the BMW Group’s
results of operations over the two-year assessment
period. The level of risk attached to interest rate risks
is classified as medium.
The BMW Group classifies potential interest rate opportunities as material.
Liquidity and operational risks
Use of the “matched funding principle” to finance the
Financial Services segment’s operations eliminates
liquidity risks to a large extent. Regular measurement
and monitoring ensure that cash inflows and outflows
from transactions in varying maturity cycles and currencies offset each other. The relevant procedures are incorporated in the BMW Group’s target liquidity concept.
Operational risks are defined in the Financial Services
segment as the risk of losses arising as a consequence of
the inappropriateness or failure of internal procedures
(process risks), people (personnel-related risks), systems
(infrastructure and IT risks) and external events (external risks). These four categories of risk also include related legal and reputation risks. The comprehensive recording and measurement of risk scenarios, loss events
and countermeasures in the Operational Risk Management Suite (OpRisk-Suite) provides the basis for a systematic analysis and management of potential and / or actual
operational risks. Annual self-assessments are also carried out.
If operational risks were to materialise, they are only
likely to result in a low impact on the BMW Group’s
results of operations over the two-year assessment
period. The level of risk attached to operational risks
is classified as medium.
Legal risks
Compliance with the law is a basic prerequisite for the
success of the BMW Group. Current law provides the
binding framework for the BMW Group’s various business activities around the world. The growing international scale of operations of the BMW Group, the complexity of the business world and the whole gamut of
complex legal regulations increase the risk of laws not
being adhered to, simply because they are not known or
fully understood.
The BMW Group has established a Compliance Organisation aimed at ensuring that its representative bodies,
managers and staff act in a lawful manner at all times.
Further information on the BMW Group’s Compliance
Organisation can be found in the section “Corporate
Governance”.
Like all internationally operating enterprises, the BMW
Group is confronted with legal disputes relating, in particular, to warranty claims, product liability, infringements of protected rights, and proceedings initiated
by government agencies. Any of these matters could,
among other outcomes, have an adverse impact on the
Group’s reputation. Such proceedings are typical for
the sector and can arise as a consequence of realigning
product or purchasing strategies to suit changed market
conditions. Particularly in the US market, class action
lawsuits and product liability risks can have substantial
financial consequences and cause damage to the Group’s
public image. The BMW Group recognises appropriate
levels of provision for lawsuits. A part of these risks, 
81 Combined Management Report
particularly regarding the US market, is insured where
this makes business sense. Some risks, however, cannot
be assessed in full or completely defy assessment. It
cannot be ruled out that losses from damages could
arise which are either not covered or not fully covered
by insurance policies or provisions.
The high quality of the Group’s products, which is ensured by regular quality audits and ongoing improvement
measures, helps to reduce this risk. In comparison with
competitors, this can give rise to benefits and opportunities for the BMW Group.
If legal risks were to materialise, they are only likely to
have a low impact on the BMW Group’s results of operations over the two-year assessment period. The level of
risk attached to legal risks is classified as low. This assessment also includes consideration of risks arising from
ongoing court and arbitration proceedings. However, it
cannot be ruled out that new legal risks, as yet unidentified, could materialise which could have a high impact
on the BMW Group’s results of operations and financial
condition.
Overall assessment of the risk and
opportunities situation
The overall risk assessment is based on a consolidated
view of all significant individual risks and opportunities.
In view of the growing level of strategic and sector-specific risks, the overall risk situation for the BMW Group
has increased marginally compared to the previous year.
In addition to the risk categories described above, it is
possible that unforeseeable events could have an adverse impact on the BMW Group’s results of operations,
financial position and net assets as well as its reputation.
We have created a comprehensive risk management
system that ensures we can master risks. In addition,
the opportunities described above could potentially
help the BMW Group to achieve its targets and forecasts.
From today’s perspective, management does not see any
threat to the BMW Group’s going-concern status. As
in the previous year, identified risks are considered to
be manageable, but could – just like opportunities –
have an impact on the BMW Group’s forecasts if they were
to materialise. The BMW Group’s liquidity is stable and
all cash requirements are currently covered by available
funds and accessible credit lines.
Business. Ford Motor Company was incorporated in Delaware in 1919. We acquired the business of a Michigan company, also known as Ford Motor Company, which had been incorporated in 1903 to produce and sell automobiles designed and engineered by Henry Ford. We are a global automotive industry leader based in Dearborn, Michigan. We manufacture or distribute automobiles across six continents. With about 187,000 employees and 62 plants worldwide, our automotive brands include Ford and Lincoln. We provide financial services through Ford Motor Credit Company. In addition to the information about Ford and our subsidiaries contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 (“2014 Form 10-K Report” or “Report”), extensive information about our Company can be found at http://corporate.ford.com, including information about our management team, our brands and products, and our corporate governance principles. The corporate governance information on our website includes our Corporate Governance Principles, Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Personnel, Code of Ethics for the Board of Directors, Code of Corporate Conduct for all employees, and the Charters for each of the Committees of our Board of Directors. In addition, any amendments to our Code of Ethics or waivers granted to our directors and executive officers will be posted on our corporate website. All of these documents may be accessed by going to our corporate website, or may be obtained free of charge by writing to our Shareholder Relations Department, Ford Motor Company, One American Road, P.O. Box 1899, Dearborn, Michigan 48126-1899. Our recent periodic reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, are available free of charge at http://shareholder.ford.com. This includes recent Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, and Current Reports on Form 8-K, as well as any amendments to those Reports. Recent Section 16 filings made with the SEC by the Company or any of our executive officers or directors with respect to our Common Stock also are made available free of charge through our website. We post each of these documents on our website as soon as reasonably practicable after it is electronically filed with the SEC. Our reports filed with the SEC also may be found on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. The foregoing information regarding our website and its content is for convenience only and not deemed to be incorporated by reference into this Report nor filed with the SEC. 1 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 1 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1. Business (Continued) 2 OVERVIEW Segments. We review and present our business results in two sectors: Automotive and Financial Services. Within these sectors, our business is divided into reportable segments (referred to herein as “segments,” “business units,” or “regions”) based on the organizational structure that we use to evaluate performance and make decisions on resource allocation, as well as availability and materiality of separate financial results consistent with that structure. The reportable segments within our Automotive and Financial Services sectors at December 31, 2014 were as described in the table below: Business Sector Reportable Segments Description Automotive: North America Primarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories in North America (the United States, Canada, and Mexico), together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. South America Primarily includes the sale of Ford vehicles, service parts, and accessories in South America, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. Europe Primarily includes the sale of Ford vehicles, components, service parts, and accessories in Europe, Turkey, and Russia, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. Middle East & Africa Primarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories in the Middle East and Africa, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. Asia Pacific Primarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories in the Asia Pacific region, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. Financial Services: Ford Credit Primarily includes vehicle-related financing and leasing. Other Financial Services Includes a variety of businesses, including holding companies and real estaterelated activities. AUTOMOTIVE SECTOR General Our vehicle brands are Ford and Lincoln. In 2014, we sold approximately 6,323,000 vehicles at wholesale throughout the world. See “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” (“Item Item 1. Business (Continued) 3 geopolitical events, and other factors (including the cost of purchasing and operating cars and trucks and the availability and cost of financing and fuel). As we recently have seen in the United States and Europe, in particular, the number of cars and trucks sold may vary substantially from year to year. Further, the automotive industry is a highly competitive business that has a wide and growing variety of product offerings from a growing number of manufacturers. Our wholesale unit volumes vary with the level of total industry demand and our share of that industry demand. Our wholesale unit volumes also are influenced by the level of dealer inventory. Our share is influenced by how our products are perceived in comparison to those offered by other manufacturers based on many factors, including price, quality, styling, reliability, safety, fuel efficiency, functionality, and reputation. Our share also is affected by the timing and frequency of new model introductions. Our ability to satisfy changing consumer preferences with respect to type or size of vehicle, as well as design and performance characteristics, affects our sales and earnings significantly. As with other manufacturers, the profitability of our business is affected by many factors, including: • Wholesale unit volumes • Margin of profit on each vehicle sold - which in turn is affected by many factors, such as: Market factors - volume and mix of vehicles and options sold, and net pricing (reflecting, among other factors, incentive programs) Costs of components and raw materials necessary for production of vehicles Costs for customer warranty claims and additional service actions Costs for safety, emissions, and fuel economy technology and equipment • A high proportion of relatively fixed structural costs, so that small changes in wholesale unit volumes can significantly affect overall profitability Our industry has a very competitive pricing environment, driven in part by industry excess capacity, which is concentrated in Europe and Asia but affects other markets because much of this capacity can be redirected to other markets. The decline in the value of the yen during the past three years also has contributed significantly to competitive pressures in many of our markets. For the past several decades, manufacturers typically have given price discounts and other marketing incentives to maintain market share and production levels. A discussion of our strategies to compete in this pricing environment is set forth in the “Overview” section in Item 7. Competitive Position. The worldwide automotive industry consists of many producers, with no single dominant producer. Certain manufacturers, however, account for the major percentage of total sales within particular countries, especially their countries of origin. Key competitors with global presence include Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, General Motors Company, Honda Motor Company, Hyundai-Kia Automotive Group, PSA Peugeot Citroen, Renault-Nissan B.V., Suzuki Motor Corporation, Toyota Motor Corporation, and Volkswagen AG Group. Seasonality. We generally record the sale of a vehicle (and recognize revenue) when it is produced and shipped or delivered to our customer (i.e., the dealership). See the “Overview” section in Item 7 for additional discussion of revenue recognition practices. We manage our vehicle production schedule based on a number of factors, including retail sales (i.e., units sold by our dealerships to their customers at retail) and dealer stock levels (i.e., the number of units held in inventory by our dealerships for sale to their customers). Historically, we have experienced some seasonal fluctuation in the business, with production in many markets tending to be higher in the first half of the year to meet demand in the spring and summer (typically the strongest sales months of the year). Raw Materials. We purchase a wide variety of raw materials from numerous suppliers around the world for use in production of our vehicles. These materials include base metals (e.g., steel, iron castings, and aluminum), precious metals (e.g., palladium), energy (e.g., natural gas), and plastics/resins (e.g., polypropylene). We believe we have adequate supplies or sources of availability of raw materials necessary to meet our needs. There always are risks and uncertainties with respect to the supply of raw materials, however, which could impact availability in sufficient quantities to meet our needs. See the “Overview” section of Item 7 for a discussion of commodity and energy price trends, and “Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk” (“Item 7A”) for a discussion of commodity price risks. Backlog Orders. We generally produce and ship our products on average within approximately 20 days after an order is deemed to become firm. Therefore, no significant amount of backlog orders accumulates during any period. Item 1. Business (Continued) 2 OVERVIEW Segments. We review and present our business results in two sectors: Automotive and Financial Services. Within these sectors, our business is divided into reportable segments (referred to herein as “segments,” “business units,” or “regions”) based on the organizational structure that we use to evaluate performance and make decisions on resource allocation, as well as availability and materiality of separate financial results consistent with that structure. The reportable segments within our Automotive and Financial Services sectors at December 31, 2014 were as described in the table below: Business Sector Reportable Segments Description Automotive: North America Primarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories in North America (the United States, Canada, and Mexico), together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. South America Primarily includes the sale of Ford vehicles, service parts, and accessories in South America, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. Europe Primarily includes the sale of Ford vehicles, components, service parts, and accessories in Europe, Turkey, and Russia, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. Middle East & Africa Primarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories in the Middle East and Africa, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. Asia Pacific Primarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories in the Asia Pacific region, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. Financial Services: Ford Credit Primarily includes vehicle-related financing and leasing. Other Financial Services Includes a variety of businesses, including holding companies and real estaterelated activities. AUTOMOTIVE SECTOR General Our vehicle brands are Ford and Lincoln. In 2014, we sold approximately 6,323,000 vehicles at wholesale throughout the world. See “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” (“Item 7”) for discussion of our calculation of wholesale unit volumes. Substantially all of our vehicles, parts, and accessories are sold through distributors and dealers (collectively, “dealerships”), the substantial majority of which are independently owned. At December 31, 2014, the approximate number of dealerships worldwide distributing our vehicle brands was as follows: Brand Number of Dealerships at December 31, 2014 Ford 10,938 Ford-Lincoln (combined) 869 Lincoln 173 Total 11,980 We do not depend on any single customer or a few customers to the extent that the loss of such customers would have a material adverse effect on our business. In addition to the products we sell to our dealerships for retail sale, we also sell vehicles to our dealerships for sale to fleet customers, including commercial fleet customers, daily rental car companies, and governments. We also sell parts and accessories, primarily to our dealerships (which in turn sell these products to retail customers) and to authorized parts distributors (which in turn primarily sell these products to retailers). We also offer extended service contracts. The worldwide automotive industry is affected significantly by general economic conditions over which we have little control. Vehicles are durable goods, and consumers have latitude in determining whether and when to replace an existing vehicle. The decision whether to purchase a vehicle may be affected significantly by slowing economic growth, 3 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 3 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1. Business (Continued) 4 Intellectual Property. We own or hold licenses to use numerous patents, copyrights, and trademarks on a global basis. Our policy is to protect our competitive position by, among other methods, filing U.S. and international patent applications to protect technology and improvements that we consider important to the development of our business. We have generated a large number of patents, and expect this portfolio to continue to grow as we actively pursue additional technological innovation. We currently have approximately 30,400 active patents and pending patent applications globally, with an average age for patents in our active patent portfolio of just under five and a half years. In addition to this intellectual property, we also rely on our proprietary knowledge and ongoing technological innovation to develop and maintain our competitive position. Although we believe these patents, patent applications, and know-how, in the aggregate, are important to the conduct of our business, and we obtain licenses to use certain intellectual property owned by others, none is individually considered material to our business. We also own numerous trademarks and service marks that contribute to the identity and recognition of our Company and its products and services globally. Certain of these marks are integral to the conduct of our business, a loss of any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business. Warranty Coverage, Field Service Actions, and Customer Satisfaction Actions. We currently provide warranties on vehicles we sell. Warranties are offered for specific periods of time and/or mileage, and vary depending upon the type of product and the geographic location of its sale. Pursuant to these warranties, we will repair, replace, or adjust all parts on a vehicle that are defective in factory-supplied materials or workmanship during the specified warranty period. In addition to the costs associated with this warranty coverage provided on our vehicles, we also incur costs as a result of field service actions (i.e., safety recalls, emission recalls, and other product campaigns), and for customer satisfaction actions. For additional information regarding warranty and related costs, see “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 and Note 27 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. 4 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 4 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1. Business (Continued) 5 Industry Sales Volume Industry sales volume in each region and in certain key markets within each region during the past three years were as follows (in millions of units): Industry Sales Volume (a) 2014 2013 2012 United States 16.8 15.9 14.8 Canada 1.9 1.8 1.7 Mexico 1.2 1.1 1.0 North America 20.2 19.1 17.8 Brazil 3.5 3.8 3.8 Argentina 0.7 0.9 0.8 South America 5.3 5.9 5.9 Britain 2.8 2.6 2.3 Germany 3.4 3.3 3.4 Russia 2.5 2.8 3.0 Turkey 0.8 0.9 0.8 Europe (b) 18.6 18.3 18.6 Middle East & Africa 4.2 3.9 4.0 China 24.0 22.2 19.0 Australia 1.1 1.1 1.1 India 3.2 3.3 3.6 ASEAN (c) 3.1 3.5 3.4 Asia Pacific 39.6 37.8 34.8 Global 87.9 85.0 81.1 ______________ (a) Industry sales volume is an internal estimate based on publicly-available data collected from various government, private, and public sources around the globe and is based, in part, on estimated vehicle registrations. (b) Europe 20 industry sales volume was 14.6 million, 13.8 million, and 14.1 million in 2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively. Europe 20 consists of Austria, Belgium, Britain, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. (c) ASEAN includes Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam, and Malaysia. Item 1. Business (Continued) 4 Intellectual Property. We own or hold licenses to use numerous patents, copyrights, and trademarks on a global basis. Our policy is to protect our competitive position by, among other methods, filing U.S. and international patent applications to protect technology and improvements that we consider important to the development of our business. We have generated a large number of patents, and expect this portfolio to continue to grow as we actively pursue additional technological innovation. We currently have approximately 30,400 active patents and pending patent applications globally, with an average age for patents in our active patent portfolio of just under five and a half years. In addition to this intellectual property, we also rely on our proprietary knowledge and ongoing technological innovation to develop and maintain our competitive position. Although we believe these patents, patent applications, and know-how, in the aggregate, are important to the conduct of our business, and we obtain licenses to use certain intellectual property owned by others, none is individually considered material to our business. We also own numerous trademarks and service marks that contribute to the identity and recognition of our Company and its products and services globally. Certain of these marks are integral to the conduct of our business, a loss of any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business. Warranty Coverage, Field Service Actions, and Customer Satisfaction Actions. We currently provide warranties on vehicles we sell. Warranties are offered for specific periods of time and/or mileage, and vary depending upon the type of product and the geographic location of its sale. Pursuant to these warranties, we will repair, replace, or adjust all parts on a vehicle that are defective in factory-supplied materials or workmanship during the specified warranty period. In addition to the costs associated with this warranty coverage provided on our vehicles, we also incur costs as a result of field service actions (i.e., safety recalls, emission recalls, and other product campaigns), and for customer satisfaction actions. For additional information regarding warranty and related costs, see “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 and Note 27 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. 5 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 5 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1. Business (Continued) 6 Wholesales Our wholesale unit volumes in each region and in certain key markets within each region during the past three years were as follows (in thousands of units): Wholesales (a)(b) 2014 2013 2012 United States 2,457 2,608 2,302 Canada 288 283 281 Mexico 77 91 83 North America 2,842 3,006 2,693 Brazil 320 364 336 Argentina 94 118 107 South America 463 538 498 Britain 425 379 337 Germany 237 227 208 Russia 57 105 134 Turkey 91 114 108 Europe 1,387 1,317 1,295 Middle East & Africa 192 199 221 China 1,116 936 627 Australia 80 85 94 India 77 80 87 ASEAN 94 99 95 Asia Pacific 1,439 1,270 961 Total Company 6,323 6,330 5,668 ______________ (a) Wholesale unit volumes include sales of medium and heavy trucks. (b) Wholesale unit volumes include all Ford and Lincoln badged units (whether produced by Ford or by an unconsolidated affiliate) that are sold to dealerships, units manufactured by Ford that are sold to other manufacturers, units distributed for other manufacturers, and local brand units produced by our unconsolidated Chinese joint venture Jiangling Motors Corporation, Ltd. (“JMC”) that are sold to dealerships. Vehicles sold to daily rental car companies that are subject to a guaranteed repurchase option (i.e., rental repurchase), as well as other sales of finished vehicles for which the recognition of revenue is deferred (e.g., consignments), also are included in wholesale unit volumes. Revenue from certain vehicles in wholesale unit volumes (specifically, Ford badged vehicles produced and distributed by our unconsolidated affiliates, as well as JMC brand vehicles) are not included in our revenue. 6 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 6 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1. Business (Continued) 7 Market Share Our market share in each region and in certain key markets within each region during the past three years was as follows: Market Share (a) 2014 2013 2012 United States 14.7% 15.7% 15.2% Canada 15.5 15.9 16.1 Mexico 6.9 8.0 8.2 North America 14.2 15.2 14.8 Brazil 9.4% 9.4% 9.1% Argentina 14.1 12.6 12.3 South America 8.9 8.9 8.6 Britain 14.5% 14.6% 14.9% Germany 7.1 6.9 6.8 Russia 2.6 3.8 4.3 Turkey 11.7 12.9 13.8 Europe (b) 7.2 7.3 7.4 Middle East & Africa 4.7% 5.0% 4.3% China 4.5% 4.1% 3.2% Australia 7.2 7.7 8.1 India 2.4 2.5 2.4 ASEAN 3.1 2.7 2.6 Asia Pacific (c) 3.5 3.3 2.6 Global 7.2% 7.3% 6.9% ______________ (a) Market share represents reported retail sales of our brands as a percent of total industry sales volume in the relevant market or region. Market share is based, in part, on estimated vehicle registrations; includes medium and heavy trucks. (b) Europe 20 market share was 8.0%, 7.8%, and 7.9% in 2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively. (c) Asia Pacific market share includes Ford brand and JMC brand vehicles produced and sold by our unconsolidated affiliates. Item 1. Business (Continued) 6 Wholesales Our wholesale unit volumes in each region and in certain key markets within each region during the past three years were as follows (in thousands of units): Wholesales (a)(b) 2014 2013 2012 United States 2,457 2,608 2,302 Canada 288 283 281 Mexico 77 91 83 North America 2,842 3,006 2,693 Brazil 320 364 336 Argentina 94 118 107 South America 463 538 498 Britain 425 379 337 Germany 237 227 208 Russia 57 105 134 Turkey 91 114 108 Europe 1,387 1,317 1,295 Middle East & Africa 192 199 221 China 1,116 936 627 Australia 80 85 94 India 77 80 87 ASEAN 94 99 95 Asia Pacific 1,439 1,270 961 Total Company 6,323 6,330 5,668 ______________ (a) Wholesale unit volumes include sales of medium and heavy trucks. (b) Wholesale unit volumes include all Ford and Lincoln badged units (whether produced by Ford or by an unconsolidated affiliate) that are sold to dealerships, units manufactured by Ford that are sold to other manufacturers, units distributed for other manufacturers, and local brand units produced by our unconsolidated Chinese joint venture Jiangling Motors Corporation, Ltd. (“JMC”) that are sold to dealerships. Vehicles sold to daily rental car companies that are subject to a guaranteed repurchase option (i.e., rental repurchase), as well as other sales of finished vehicles for which the recognition of revenue is deferred (e.g., consignments), also are included in wholesale unit volumes. Revenue from certain vehicles in wholesale unit volumes (specifically, Ford badged vehicles produced and distributed by our unconsolidated affiliates, as well as JMC brand vehicles) are not included in our revenue. 7 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 7 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1. Business (Continued) 8 FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR Ford Motor Credit Company LLC Our wholly-owned subsidiary Ford Motor Credit Company LLC (“Ford Credit”) offers a wide variety of automotive financing products to and through automotive dealers throughout the world. The predominant share of Ford Credit’s business consists of financing our vehicles and supporting our dealers. Ford Credit earns its revenue primarily from payments made under retail installment sale and lease contracts that it originates and purchases; interest rate supplements and other support payments from us and our subsidiaries; and payments made under dealer financing programs. As a result of these financing activities, Ford Credit has a large portfolio of finance receivables and operating leases which it classifies into two portfolios— “consumer” and “non-consumer.” Finance receivables and operating leases in the consumer portfolio include products offered to individuals and businesses that finance the acquisition of our vehicles from dealers for personal and commercial use. Retail financing includes retail installment sale contracts for new and used vehicles and direct financing leases for new vehicles to retail customers, government entities, daily rental car companies, and fleet customers. Finance receivables in the non-consumer portfolio include products offered to automotive dealers. Ford Credit makes wholesale loans to dealers to finance the purchase of vehicle inventory (i.e., floorplan financing), as well as loans to dealers to finance working capital and improvements to dealership facilities, finance the purchase of dealership real estate, and finance other dealer vehicle programs. Ford Credit also purchases receivables generated by us and our subsidiaries, primarily related to the sale of parts and accessories to dealers, receivables from Ford-related loans, and certain used vehicles from daily rental fleet companies. Ford Credit does business in the United States and Canada through business centers. Outside of the United States, Europe is Ford Credit’s largest operation. Ford Credit’s European operation is managed through its United Kingdombased subsidiary, FCE Bank plc (“FCE”). Within Europe, FCE’s largest markets are the United Kingdom and Germany, representing approximately 67% of FCE’s finance receivables and operating leases. The following table shows Ford Credit’s financing shares of new Ford and Lincoln vehicles sold by dealers in the United States and new Ford vehicles sold by dealers in Europe, as well as its wholesale financing shares of new Ford and Lincoln vehicles acquired by dealers in the United States (excluding fleet) and new Ford vehicles acquired by dealers in Europe: Years Ended December 31, 2014 2013 2012 United States - Financing Share Retail installment and lease 45% 40% 38% Wholesale 77 77 78 Europe - Financing Share Retail installment and lease 36% 34% 32% Wholesale 98 98 98 See Item 7 and Notes 5, 6, and 7 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for a detailed discussion of Ford Credit’s receivables, credit losses, allowance for credit losses, loss-to-receivables ratios, funding sources, and funding strategies. See Item 7A for discussion of how Ford Credit manages its financial market risks. We routinely sponsor special retail and lease incentives to dealers’ customers who choose to finance or lease our vehicles from Ford Credit. In order to compensate Ford Credit for the lower interest or lease payments offered to the retail customer, we pay the value of the incentive directly to Ford Credit when it originates the retail finance or lease contract. These programs increase Ford Credit’s financing volume and share. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for information about our accounting for these programs. On April 30, 2014, we entered into a Relationship Agreement with Ford Credit, pursuant to which, if Ford Credit’s managed leverage for a calendar quarter were to be higher than 11.5 to 1 (as reported in its most recent periodic report), Ford Credit could require us to make or cause to be made a capital contribution to it in an amount sufficient to have caused such managed leverage to have been 11.5 to 1. No capital contributions have been made pursuant to this agreement. The agreement also limits to $2 billion the amount Ford Credit may borrow under our Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of April 30, 2014. In a separate agreement with FCE, Ford Credit also has agreed to maintain FCE’s net worth in excess of $500 million; no payments have been made pursuant to that agreement. 8 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 8 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1. Business (Continued) 9 GOVERNMENTAL STANDARDS Many governmental standards and regulations relating to safety, fuel economy, emissions control, noise control, vehicle recycling, substances of concern, vehicle damage, and theft prevention are applicable to new motor vehicles, engines, and equipment manufactured for sale in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere. In addition, manufacturing and other automotive assembly facilities in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere are subject to stringent standards regulating air emissions, water discharges, and the handling and disposal of hazardous substances. The most significant of the standards and regulations affecting us are discussed below: Vehicle Emissions Control U.S. Requirements - Federal Emissions Standards. The federal Clean Air Act imposes stringent limits on the amount of regulated pollutants that lawfully may be emitted by new vehicles and engines produced for sale in the United States. In 2014, the EPA finalized new “Tier 3” regulations that phase in increasingly stringent motor vehicle emissions standards beginning with the 2017 model year; compliance with these standards could be challenging. Compliance with automobile emission standards depends in part on the widespread availability of high-quality and consistent automotive fuels that the vehicles were designed to use. Fuel variables that can affect vehicle emissions include ethanol content, octane rating, and the use of metallic-based fuel additives, among other things. There are various ongoing regulatory and judicial proceedings related to fuel quality at the national and state level, and the outcome of these proceedings could affect vehicle manufacturers’ warranty costs as well as their ability to comply with vehicle emission standards. U.S. Requirements - California and Other State Emissions Standards. Pursuant to the Clean Air Act, California may establish its own unique vehicle emissions control standards; the California standards can also be adopted by other states. The California Air Resources Board has adopted “LEV III” standards, which took effect with the 2015 model year and impose increasingly stringent tailpipe and evaporative emissions requirements for light and medium duty vehicles. Thirteen states, primarily located in the Northeast and Northwest, have adopted the LEV III standards. The California vehicle emissions program also includes requirements for manufacturers to produce and deliver for sale so-called zero-emission vehicles (“ZEVs”). The current ZEV regulations mandate substantial annual increases in the production and sale of battery-electric, fuel cell, and plug-in hybrid vehicles, particularly for the 2018 - 2025 model years. By the 2025 model year, approximately 15% of a manufacturer’s total California sales volume will need to be made up of such vehicles. Compliance with the 2018 - 2025 model year ZEV rules could have a substantial adverse effect on our sales volumes and profits. We are concerned that the market and infrastructure in California may not support the large volumes of advanced-technology vehicles that manufacturers will be required to produce, especially if gasoline prices remain relatively low. We also are concerned about enforcement of the ZEV mandate in other states that have adopted California’s ZEV program, where the existence of a market for such vehicles is even less certain. CARB conducts periodic reviews of its upcoming ZEV requirements, taking into account factors such as technology developments and market acceptance. Ford and the industry will be active participants in such reviews, with the goal of ensuring that ZEV requirements are feasible and not excessively burdensome. European Requirements. European Union (“EU”) directives and related legislation limit the amount of regulated pollutants that may be emitted by new motor vehicles and engines sold in the EU. Stringent new “Stage V” emissions standards took effect for vehicle registrations starting in January 2011; Stage VI requirements apply from September 2014, with a second phase beginning in September 2017. Stage V particulate standards drove the deployment of particulate filters in diesel engines, and Stage VI further tightens the standard for oxides of nitrogen. This will drive the need for additional diesel exhaust after-treatment, which will add cost and potentially impact the diesel CO2 advantage. These technology requirements add cost and further erode the fuel economy cost/benefit advantage of diesel vehicles. The additional requirements for the second phase of Stage VI will further increase the stringency of particle emissions for direct injection gasoline vehicles, and apply more demanding on-board diagnostic thresholds for all vehicles. The costs associated with additional testing that may be required for the second phase of Stage VI concerning real driving emissions could be significant. Item 1. Business (Continued) 8 FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR Ford Motor Credit Company LLC Our wholly-owned subsidiary Ford Motor Credit Company LLC (“Ford Credit”) offers a wide variety of automotive financing products to and through automotive dealers throughout the world. The predominant share of Ford Credit’s business consists of financing our vehicles and supporting our dealers. Ford Credit earns its revenue primarily from payments made under retail installment sale and lease contracts that it originates and purchases; interest rate supplements and other support payments from us and our subsidiaries; and payments made under dealer financing programs. As a result of these financing activities, Ford Credit has a large portfolio of finance receivables and operating leases which it classifies into two portfolios— “consumer” and “non-consumer.” Finance receivables and operating leases in the consumer portfolio include products offered to individuals and businesses that finance the acquisition of our vehicles from dealers for personal and commercial use. Retail financing includes retail installment sale contracts for new and used vehicles and direct financing leases for new vehicles to retail customers, government entities, daily rental car companies, and fleet customers. Finance receivables in the non-consumer portfolio include products offered to automotive dealers. Ford Credit makes wholesale loans to dealers to finance the purchase of vehicle inventory (i.e., floorplan financing), as well as loans to dealers to finance working capital and improvements to dealership facilities, finance the purchase of dealership real estate, and finance other dealer vehicle programs. Ford Credit also purchases receivables generated by us and our subsidiaries, primarily related to the sale of parts and accessories to dealers, receivables from Ford-related loans, and certain used vehicles from daily rental fleet companies. Ford Credit does business in the United States and Canada through business centers. Outside of the United States, Europe is Ford Credit’s largest operation. Ford Credit’s European operation is managed through its United Kingdombased subsidiary, FCE Bank plc (“FCE”). Within Europe, FCE’s largest markets are the United Kingdom and Germany, representing approximately 67% of FCE’s finance receivables and operating leases. The following table shows Ford Credit’s financing shares of new Ford and Lincoln vehicles sold by dealers in the United States and new Ford vehicles sold by dealers in Europe, as well as its wholesale financing shares of new Ford and Lincoln vehicles acquired by dealers in the United States (excluding fleet) and new Ford vehicles acquired by dealers in Europe: Years Ended December 31, 2014 2013 2012 United States - Financing Share Retail installment and lease 45% 40% 38% Wholesale 77 77 78 Europe - Financing Share Retail installment and lease 36% 34% 32% Wholesale 98 98 98 See Item 7 and Notes 5, 6, and 7 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for a detailed discussion of Ford Credit’s receivables, credit losses, allowance for credit losses, loss-to-receivables ratios, funding sources, and funding strategies. See Item 7A for discussion of how Ford Credit manages its financial market risks. We routinely sponsor special retail and lease incentives to dealers’ customers who choose to finance or lease our vehicles from Ford Credit. In order to compensate Ford Credit for the lower interest or lease payments offered to the retail customer, we pay the value of the incentive directly to Ford Credit when it originates the retail finance or lease contract. These programs increase Ford Credit’s financing volume and share. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for information about our accounting for these programs. On April 30, 2014, we entered into a Relationship Agreement with Ford Credit, pursuant to which, if Ford Credit’s managed leverage for a calendar quarter were to be higher than 11.5 to 1 (as reported in its most recent periodic report), Ford Credit could require us to make or cause to be made a capital contribution to it in an amount sufficient to have caused such managed leverage to have been 11.5 to 1. No capital contributions have been made pursuant to this agreement. The agreement also limits to $2 billion the amount Ford Credit may borrow under our Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of April 30, 2014. In a separate agreement with FCE, Ford Credit also has agreed to maintain FCE’s net worth in excess of $500 million; no payments have been made pursuant to that agreement. 9 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 9 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1. Business (Continued) 10 Other National Requirements. Many countries, in an effort to address air quality concerns, are adopting previous versions of European or United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (“UN-ECE”) mobile source emissions regulations. Some countries have adopted more advanced regulations based on the most recent version of European or U.S. regulations; for example, China adopted emission regulations for large cities based on European Stage V emissions standards. Korea and Taiwan have adopted very stringent U.S.-based standards for gasoline vehicles, and Europeanbased standards for diesel vehicles. Although these countries have adopted regulations based UN-ECE or U.S. standards, there may be some unique testing provisions that require emission-control systems to be redesigned for these markets. Canadian criteria emissions regulations are aligned with U.S. Tier 2 requirements discussed above. In September 2014, the Canadian federal government published the proposed amendments to the On-Road Vehicle and Engine Emission Regulations and the Sulphur in Gasoline Regulations. The final regulations are expected to align standards with the U.S. Tier 3 regulations. Furthermore, not all countries have adopted appropriate fuel quality standards to accompany the stringent emissions standards adopted. This could lead to compliance problems, particularly if on-board diagnostic or in-use surveillance requirements are implemented. Japan has unique standards and test procedures, which may require that unique emissions control systems be designed for the Japanese market. Brazil, Argentina, and Chile have also introduced more stringent emissions standards. Since 2012, Brazil has applied European Stage V emissions and on-board diagnostic standards for heavy trucks, and more stringent light vehicle limits. Argentina also will apply light vehicle Stage V standards beginning in 2015 (for new vehicle homologations) and 2017 (for new vehicle registrations). Chile introduced more stringent emission standards (i.e., European Stage V or corresponding U.S. emissions standards) nationwide for light and medium duty vehicles in September 2014. Since October 2014, new heavy duty vehicle models are required to meet Stage V (or corresponding U.S. emissions standards). All other new heavy vehicles are required to meet these standards beginning October 2015. Vehicle Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Standards U.S. Requirements - Light Duty Vehicles. Federal law requires that light duty vehicles meet minimum corporate average fuel economy (“CAFE”) standards set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (“NHTSA”). A manufacturer is subject to substantial civil penalties if it fails to meet the CAFE standard in any model year, after taking into account all available credits for the preceding three model years and expected credits for the five succeeding model years. The law requires NHTSA to promulgate and enforce separate CAFE standards applicable to each manufacturer’s fleet of domestic passenger cars, imported passenger cars, and light trucks, respectively. The EPA also regulates vehicle greenhouse gas emissions under the Clean Air Act. Because the vast majority of greenhouse gases emitted by a vehicle are the result of fuel combustion, greenhouse gas emission standards effectively are fuel economy standards. Thus, it is necessary for NHTSA and EPA to coordinate with each other on their fuel economy and greenhouse gas (“GHG”) standards, respectively, to avoid potential inconsistencies. In 2010, EPA and NHTSA jointly promulgated regulations establishing the “One National Program” of CAFE and GHG regulations for light duty vehicles for the 2012-2016 model years. In 2012, EPA and NHTSA jointly promulgated regulations extending the One National Program framework through the 2025 model year. These rules require manufacturers to achieve, across the industry, a light duty fleet average fuel economy of approximately 35.5 mpg by the 2016 model year, 45 mpg by the 2021 model year, and 54.5 mpg by the 2025 model year. Each manufacturer’s specific task depends on the mix of vehicles it sells. The rules include the opportunity for manufacturers to earn credits for technologies that achieve real-world CO2 reductions, and fuel economy improvements that are not captured by EPA fuel economy test procedures. Manufacturers also can earn credits for GHG reductions not specifically tied to fuel economy, such as improvements in air conditioning systems. The One National Program standards become increasingly stringent over time, and they will be difficult to meet if fuel prices remain relatively low and market conditions do not drive consumers to purchase electric vehicles and other highly fuel-efficient vehicles in large numbers. The rules provide for a midterm evaluation process under which, by 2018, EPA and NHTSA will re-evaluate their standards for model years 2022-2025 in order to ensure that those standards are feasible and optimal in light of intervening events. We are particularly concerned about the commercial feasibility of meeting the 2022-2025 model year GHG and CAFE standards, and therefore the midterm evaluation process is very important to Ford and the auto industry. Ford’s ability to comply with the 2022-2025 model year standards remains unclear because of the many unknowns regarding technology development, market conditions, and other factors so far into the future. We intend to be an active participant in the midterm evaluation process for these standards. Our concern about the feasibility of the fuel economy / GHG standards also extends to some of the pre-2022 model year standards, which are not covered by the midterm evaluation. 10 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 10 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1. Business (Continued) 11 If the agencies seek to impose and enforce fuel economy and GHG standards that are misaligned with market conditions, we likely would be forced to take various actions that could have substantial adverse effects on our sales volume and profits. Such actions likely would include restricting offerings of selected engines and popular options; increasing market support programs for our most fuel-efficient cars and light trucks; and ultimately curtailing the production and sale of certain vehicles such as high-performance cars, utilities, and/or full-size light trucks, in order to maintain compliance. California has asserted the right to regulate motor vehicle GHG emissions, and other states have asserted the right to adopt the California standards. With the adoption of the federal One National Program standards discussed above, California and the other states have agreed that compliance with the federal program would satisfy compliance with any purported state GHG requirements for the 2012-2025 model years. This avoids a patchwork of potentially conflicting federal and state GHG standards. Should California and other states ever renew their efforts to enforce state-specific motor vehicle GHG rules, this would impose significant costs on automotive manufacturers. U.S. Requirements - Heavy Duty Vehicles. EPA and NHTSA have jointly promulgated GHG and fuel economy standards on heavy duty vehicles (generally, vehicles over 8,500 pounds gross vehicle weight rating). In our case, the standards primarily affect our heavy duty pickup trucks and vans, plus vocational vehicles such as shuttle buses and delivery trucks. In 2015, EPA and NHTSA are expected to issue a notice of proposed rulemaking on a new round of standards for these vehicles, covering model year 2019 and beyond. Ford plans to review and comment on the proposed standards. As the heavy-duty standards increase in stringency, it may become more difficult to comply while continuing to offer a full lineup of heavy duty trucks. European Requirements. In December 2008, the EU approved regulation of passenger car CO2 emissions beginning in 2012 that limits the industry fleet average to a maximum of 130 grams per kilometer (“g/km”), using a sliding scale based on vehicle weight. This regulation provides different targets for each manufacturer based on the respective average vehicle weight for its fleet of vehicles. Limited credits are available for CO2 off-cycle actions (“eco-innovations”), certain alternative fuels, and vehicles with CO2 emissions below 50 g/km. A penalty system will apply for manufacturers failing to meet targets, with fees ranging from €5 to €95 per vehicle per g/km shortfall in the years 2012–2018, and €95 per g/km shortfall beginning in 2019. Manufacturers will be permitted to use a pooling agreement between wholly-owned brands to share the burden. Further pooling agreements between different manufacturers also are possible, although it is not clear that these will be of much practical benefit under the regulations. Starting in 2020, an industry target of 95 g/km has been set. Other non-EU European countries are likely to follow with similar regulations. For example, Switzerland has introduced similar rules, which began phasing-in starting in July 2012 with the same targets (which likely also will include a 2020 target of 95 g/km), although the industry average emission target is significantly higher. We face the risk of advance premium payment requirements if, for example, unexpected market fluctuation within a quarter negatively impact our average fleet performance. In separate legislation, “complementary measures” have been mandated, including requirements related to fuel economy indicators, and more-efficient low-CO2 mobile air conditioning systems. The EU Commission, Council and Parliament have approved a target for commercial light duty vehicles to be at an industry average of 175 g/km (with phase-in from 2014–2017), and 147 g/km in 2020; it is likely that other European countries, like Switzerland, will implement similar rules but under even more difficult conditions. This regulation also provides different targets for each manufacturer based on its respective average vehicle weight in its fleet of vehicles. The final mass and CO2 requirements for so-called “multi-stage vehicles” (e.g., our Transit chassis cabs) are fully allocated to the base manufacturer (e.g., Ford) so that the base manufacturer is fully responsible for the CO2 performance of the final up-fitted vehicles. The EU proposal also includes a penalty system, “super-credits” for vehicles below 50 g/km, and limited credits for CO2 off-cycle ecoinnovations, pooling, etc., similar to the passenger car CO2 regulation. The United Nations has a project underway to develop a new technical regulation for passenger car emissions and CO2. This new world light duty test procedure (“WLTP”) is focused primarily on delivering realistic CO2 and fuel consumption figures. The introduction of WLTP in Europe is likely to start with updates to CO2 labeling beginning in 2019 and could lower certain consumer label values. Costs associated with new or incremental testing for WLTP could be significant. The European Commission continues to apply political pressure for mandatory WLTP testing for regulated emissions and CO2 starting in September 2017. The European Commission has assured equivalent stringency to the existing fleet average rules for each automobile manufacturer if the 2020 fleet average targets are required to be measured on WLTP instead of under the current European NEDC requirements. Item 1. Business (Continued) 10 Other National Requirements. Many countries, in an effort to address air quality concerns, are adopting previous versions of European or United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (“UN-ECE”) mobile source emissions regulations. Some countries have adopted more advanced regulations based on the most recent version of European or U.S. regulations; for example, China adopted emission regulations for large cities based on European Stage V emissions standards. Korea and Taiwan have adopted very stringent U.S.-based standards for gasoline vehicles, and Europeanbased standards for diesel vehicles. Although these countries have adopted regulations based UN-ECE or U.S. standards, there may be some unique testing provisions that require emission-control systems to be redesigned for these markets. Canadian criteria emissions regulations are aligned with U.S. Tier 2 requirements discussed above. In September 2014, the Canadian federal government published the proposed amendments to the On-Road Vehicle and Engine Emission Regulations and the Sulphur in Gasoline Regulations. The final regulations are expected to align standards with the U.S. Tier 3 regulations. Furthermore, not all countries have adopted appropriate fuel quality standards to accompany the stringent emissions standards adopted. This could lead to compliance problems, particularly if on-board diagnostic or in-use surveillance requirements are implemented. Japan has unique standards and test procedures, which may require that unique emissions control systems be designed for the Japanese market. Brazil, Argentina, and Chile have also introduced more stringent emissions standards. Since 2012, Brazil has applied European Stage V emissions and on-board diagnostic standards for heavy trucks, and more stringent light vehicle limits. Argentina also will apply light vehicle Stage V standards beginning in 2015 (for new vehicle homologations) and 2017 (for new vehicle registrations). Chile introduced more stringent emission standards (i.e., European Stage V or corresponding U.S. emissions standards) nationwide for light and medium duty vehicles in September 2014. Since October 2014, new heavy duty vehicle models are required to meet Stage V (or corresponding U.S. emissions standards). All other new heavy vehicles are required to meet these standards beginning October 2015. Vehicle Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Standards U.S. Requirements - Light Duty Vehicles. Federal law requires that light duty vehicles meet minimum corporate average fuel economy (“CAFE”) standards set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (“NHTSA”). A manufacturer is subject to substantial civil penalties if it fails to meet the CAFE standard in any model year, after taking into account all available credits for the preceding three model years and expected credits for the five succeeding model years. The law requires NHTSA to promulgate and enforce separate CAFE standards applicable to each manufacturer’s fleet of domestic passenger cars, imported passenger cars, and light trucks, respectively. The EPA also regulates vehicle greenhouse gas emissions under the Clean Air Act. Because the vast majority of greenhouse gases emitted by a vehicle are the result of fuel combustion, greenhouse gas emission standards effectively are fuel economy standards. Thus, it is necessary for NHTSA and EPA to coordinate with each other on their fuel economy and greenhouse gas (“GHG”) standards, respectively, to avoid potential inconsistencies. In 2010, EPA and NHTSA jointly promulgated regulations establishing the “One National Program” of CAFE and GHG regulations for light duty vehicles for the 2012-2016 model years. In 2012, EPA and NHTSA jointly promulgated regulations extending the One National Program framework through the 2025 model year. These rules require manufacturers to achieve, across the industry, a light duty fleet average fuel economy of approximately 35.5 mpg by the 2016 model year, 45 mpg by the 2021 model year, and 54.5 mpg by the 2025 model year. Each manufacturer’s specific task depends on the mix of vehicles it sells. The rules include the opportunity for manufacturers to earn credits for technologies that achieve real-world CO2 reductions, and fuel economy improvements that are not captured by EPA fuel economy test procedures. Manufacturers also can earn credits for GHG reductions not specifically tied to fuel economy, such as improvements in air conditioning systems. The One National Program standards become increasingly stringent over time, and they will be difficult to meet if fuel prices remain relatively low and market conditions do not drive consumers to purchase electric vehicles and other highly fuel-efficient vehicles in large numbers. The rules provide for a midterm evaluation process under which, by 2018, EPA and NHTSA will re-evaluate their standards for model years 2022-2025 in order to ensure that those standards are feasible and optimal in light of intervening events. We are particularly concerned about the commercial feasibility of meeting the 2022-2025 model year GHG and CAFE standards, and therefore the midterm evaluation process is very important to Ford and the auto industry. Ford’s ability to comply with the 2022-2025 model year standards remains unclear because of the many unknowns regarding technology development, market conditions, and other factors so far into the future. We intend to be an active participant in the midterm evaluation process for these standards. Our concern about the feasibility of the fuel economy / GHG standards also extends to some of the pre-2022 model year standards, which are not covered by the midterm evaluation. 11 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 11 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1. Business (Continued) 12 Some European countries have implemented or are considering other initiatives for reducing CO2 vehicle emissions, including fiscal measures and CO2 labeling. For example, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Spain, Portugal, and the Netherlands, among others, have introduced taxation based on CO2 emissions. The EU CO2 requirements are likely to trigger further measures. To limit GHG emissions, the EU directive on mobile air conditioning currently requires the replacement of the current refrigerant with a lower “global warming potential” refrigerant for new vehicle types, and for all newly registered vehicles starting in January 2017. A refrigerant change adds considerable costs along the whole value chain. Other National Requirements. The Canadian federal government has regulated vehicle GHG emissions under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, beginning with the 2011 model year. The standards track the new U.S. CAFE standards for the 2011 model year and U.S. EPA GHG regulations for the 2012-2016 model years. In October, 2014, the Canadian federal government published the final changes to the regulation for light duty vehicles, which maintain alignment with U.S. EPA vehicle GHG standards for the 2017-2025 model years. The final regulation for 2014-2018 heavy duty vehicles was published in February 2013. Mexico adopted fuel economy/CO2 standards, based on the U.S. One National Program framework, that took effect in 2014. Many Asia Pacific countries (such as Australia, China, Japan, India, South Korea, Taiwan, and Vietnam) are developing or enforcing fuel efficiency or labeling targets. For example, South Korea and Japan have set fuel efficiency targets for 2020, with incentives for early adoption. China published standards for Stage IV fuel efficiency targets for 2016–2020. The fuel efficiency targets will impact the cost of vehicle technology in the future. In South America, Brazil introduced a voluntary vehicle energy-efficiency labeling program, indicating fuel consumption rates for light duty vehicles with a spark ignition engine. Brazil also published a new automotive regime which requires participation in the fuel economy labeling program. It establishes a minimum absolute CAFE value as a function of Fleet Corporate Average Mass for 2017 light duty vehicles with a spark ignition engine in order to qualify for industrialized products tax reduction for customers. Additional tax reductions are available if further fuel efficiency improvements are achieved. A severe penalty system will apply to qualified manufacturers failing to meet fuel efficiency requirement for the 2013–2017 sales period. Chile introduced requirements for fuel consumption and CO2 emissions levels of light duty vehicles to be posted at sales locations and in owner manuals beginning in February 2013. Chile introduced a tax based on urban fuel consumption and NOx emission for light and medium vehicles beginning in late 2014. In general, fuel efficiency targets may impact the cost of technology of our models in the future. Vehicle Safety U.S. Requirements. The National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (the “Safety Act”) regulates vehicles and vehicle equipment in two primary ways. First, the Safety Act prohibits the sale in the United States of any new vehicle or equipment that does not conform to applicable vehicle safety standards established by NHTSA. Meeting or exceeding many safety standards is costly, in part because the standards tend to conflict with the need to reduce vehicle weight in order to meet emissions and fuel economy standards. Second, the Safety Act requires that defects related to motor vehicle safety be remedied through safety recall campaigns. A manufacturer is obligated to recall vehicles if it determines the vehicles do not comply with a safety standard. Should we or NHTSA determine that either a safety defect or noncompliance exists with respect to any of our vehicles, the cost of such recall campaigns could be substantial. 12 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 12 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1. Business (Continued) 13 Other National Requirements. The EU and many countries around the world have established vehicle safety standards and regulations, and are likely to adopt additional or more stringent requirements in the future. The European General Safety Regulation introduced United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (“UN-ECE”) regulations, which will be required for the European Type Approval process. EU regulators also are focusing on active safety features such as lane departure warning systems, electronic stability control, and automatic brake assist. Globally, governments generally have been adopting UN-ECE based regulations with minor variations to address local concerns. Any difference between North American and UN-ECE based regulations can add complexity and costs to the development of global platform vehicles, and we continue to support efforts to harmonize regulations to reduce vehicle design complexity while providing a common level of safety performance; several recently launched bilateral negotiations on free trade can potentially contribute to this goal. New safety and recall requirements in China, India, and Gulf Cooperation Council countries also may add substantial costs and complexity to our global recall practice. In South America, additional safety requirements are being introduced or proposed in Argentina, Brazil, Chile (mainly for heavy vehicles), Ecuador, and Uruguay, influenced by Latin NCAP, which may be a driver for similar actions in other countries. In Canada, regulatory requirements are currently aligned with U.S. regulations. However, recent amendments to the Canadian Motor Vehicle Safety Act could introduce broad powers to the Minister of Transport to order manufacturers to submit a notice of defect or non-compliance when the Minister considers it would be in the interest of safety. ENGINEERING, RESEARCH, AND DEVELOPMENT We engage in engineering, research, and development primarily to improve the performance (including fuel efficiency), safety, and customer satisfaction of our products, and to develop new products. Engineering, research, and development expenses for 2014, 2013, and 2012 were $6.9 billion, $6.4 billion, and $5.5 billion, respectively. Item 1. Business (Continued) 12 Some European countries have implemented or are considering other initiatives for reducing CO2 vehicle emissions, including fiscal measures and CO2 labeling. For example, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Spain, Portugal, and the Netherlands, among others, have introduced taxation based on CO2 emissions. The EU CO2 requirements are likely to trigger further measures. To limit GHG emissions, the EU directive on mobile air conditioning currently requires the replacement of the current refrigerant with a lower “global warming potential” refrigerant for new vehicle types, and for all newly registered vehicles starting in January 2017. A refrigerant change adds considerable costs along the whole value chain. Other National Requirements. The Canadian federal government has regulated vehicle GHG emissions under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, beginning with the 2011 model year. The standards track the new U.S. CAFE standards for the 2011 model year and U.S. EPA GHG regulations for the 2012-2016 model years. In October, 2014, the Canadian federal government published the final changes to the regulation for light duty vehicles, which maintain alignment with U.S. EPA vehicle GHG standards for the 2017-2025 model years. The final regulation for 2014-2018 heavy duty vehicles was published in February 2013. Mexico adopted fuel economy/CO2 standards, based on the U.S. One National Program framework, that took effect in 2014. Many Asia Pacific countries (such as Australia, China, Japan, India, South Korea, Taiwan, and Vietnam) are developing or enforcing fuel efficiency or labeling targets. For example, South Korea and Japan have set fuel efficiency targets for 2020, with incentives for early adoption. China published standards for Stage IV fuel efficiency targets for 2016–2020. The fuel efficiency targets will impact the cost of vehicle technology in the future. In South America, Brazil introduced a voluntary vehicle energy-efficiency labeling program, indicating fuel consumption rates for light duty vehicles with a spark ignition engine. Brazil also published a new automotive regime which requires participation in the fuel economy labeling program. It establishes a minimum absolute CAFE value as a function of Fleet Corporate Average Mass for 2017 light duty vehicles with a spark ignition engine in order to qualify for industrialized products tax reduction for customers. Additional tax reductions are available if further fuel efficiency improvements are achieved. A severe penalty system will apply to qualified manufacturers failing to meet fuel efficiency requirement for the 2013–2017 sales period. Chile introduced requirements for fuel consumption and CO2 emissions levels of light duty vehicles to be posted at sales locations and in owner manuals beginning in February 2013. Chile introduced a tax based on urban fuel consumption and NOx emission for light and medium vehicles beginning in late 2014. In general, fuel efficiency targets may impact the cost of technology of our models in the future. Vehicle Safety U.S. Requirements. The National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (the “Safety Act”) regulates vehicles and vehicle equipment in two primary ways. First, the Safety Act prohibits the sale in the United States of any new vehicle or equipment that does not conform to applicable vehicle safety standards established by NHTSA. Meeting or exceeding many safety standards is costly, in part because the standards tend to conflict with the need to reduce vehicle weight in order to meet emissions and fuel economy standards. Second, the Safety Act requires that defects related to motor vehicle safety be remedied through safety recall campaigns. A manufacturer is obligated to recall vehicles if it determines the vehicles do not comply with a safety standard. Should we or NHTSA determine that either a safety defect or noncompliance exists with respect to any of our vehicles, the cost of such recall campaigns could be substantial. 13 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 13 3/10/15 2:00 AM 14 ITEM 1A. Risk Factors. We have listed below (not necessarily in order of importance or probability of occurrence) the most significant risk factors applicable to us: Decline in industry sales volume, particularly in the United States, Europe, or China, due to financial crisis, recession, geopolitical events, or other factors. Because we, like other manufacturers, have a high proportion of relatively fixed structural costs, relatively small changes in industry sales volume can have a substantial effect on our cash flow and profitability. If industry vehicle sales were to decline to levels significantly below our planning assumption, particularly in the United States, Europe, or China, due to financial crisis, recession, geopolitical events, or other factors, such as occurred during 2008 and 2009, our financial condition and results of operations would be substantially adversely affected. For discussion of economic trends, see the “Overview” section of Item 7. Decline in Ford’s market share or failure to achieve growth. To maintain competitive economies of scale and grow our global market share, we must grow our market share in fast-growing newly developed and emerging markets, particularly in our Asia Pacific region and our Middle East & Africa region, as well as maintain or grow market share in mature markets. Our market share in certain growing markets, such as China, is lower than it is in our mature markets. A significant decline in our market share in mature markets or failure to achieve growth in newly developing or emerging markets, whether due to capacity constraints, competitive pressures, protectionist trade policies, or other factors, could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Lower-than-anticipated market acceptance of Ford’s new or existing products. Although we conduct extensive market research before launching new or refreshed vehicles, many factors both within and outside our control affect the success of new or existing products in the marketplace. Offering vehicles that customers want and value can mitigate the risks of increasing price competition and declining demand, but vehicles that are perceived to be less desirable (whether in terms of price, quality, styling, safety, overall value, fuel efficiency, or other attributes) can exacerbate these risks. For example, if a new model were to experience quality issues at the time of launch, the vehicle’s perceived quality could be affected even after the issues had been corrected, resulting in lower sales volumes, market share, and profitability. In addition, with increased consumer interconnectedness through the internet, social media, and other media, mere allegations relating to quality, safety, fuel efficiency, corporate social responsibility, or other key attributes can negatively impact our reputation or market acceptance of our products, even where such allegations prove to be inaccurate or unfounded. Market shift away from sales of larger, more profitable vehicles beyond Ford’s current planning assumption, particularly in the United States. A shift in consumer preferences away from larger, more profitable vehicles at levels beyond our current planning assumption could result in an immediate and substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. Although we have a balanced portfolio of small, medium, and large cars, utilities, and trucks with competitive fuel efficiency, a shift in consumer preferences away from sales of larger, more profitable vehicles at levels greater than our current planning assumption—whether because of spiking fuel prices, a decline in the construction industry, government actions or incentives, or other reasons—still could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. An increase in or continued volatility of fuel prices, or reduced availability of fuel. An increase in fuel prices, continued price volatility, or reduced availability of fuel, particularly in the United States, could result in weakening of demand for relatively more-profitable large cars, utilities, and trucks, while increasing demand for relatively lessprofitable small vehicles. Continuation or acceleration of such a trend beyond our current planning assumption, or volatility in demand across segments, could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Continued or increased price competition resulting from industry excess capacity, currency fluctuations, or other factors. The global automotive industry is intensely competitive, with manufacturing capacity far exceeding current demand. According to the January 2015 report issued by IHS Automotive, the global automotive industry is estimated to have had excess capacity of about 29 million units in 2014. Industry overcapacity has resulted in many manufacturers offering marketing incentives on vehicles in an attempt to maintain and grow market share; these incentives historically have included a combination of subsidized financing or leasing programs, price rebates, and other incentives. As a result, we are not necessarily able to set our prices to offset higher costs of marketing incentives, commodity or other cost increases, or the impact of adverse currency fluctuations, including pricing advantages foreign competitors may have because of their weaker home market currencies. Continuation of or increased excess capacity could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. 14 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 14 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 15 Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates. As a resourceintensive manufacturing operation, we are exposed to a variety of market and asset risks, including the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates. These risks affect our Automotive and Financial Services sectors. We monitor and manage these exposures as an integral part of our overall risk management program, which recognizes the unpredictability of markets and seeks to reduce potentially adverse effects on our business. Nevertheless, changes in currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates cannot always be predicted or hedged. In addition, because of intense price competition and our high level of fixed costs, we may not be able to address such changes even if foreseeable. As a result, substantial unfavorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, or interest rates could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. See “Overview” to Item 7 and Item 7A for additional discussion of currency, commodity price, and interest rate risks. Adverse effects resulting from economic, geopolitical, or other events. With the increasing interconnectedness of global economic and financial systems, a financial crisis, natural disaster, geopolitical crisis, or other significant event in one area of the world can have an immediate and devastating impact on markets around the world. For example, the financial crisis that began in the United States in 2008 quickly spread to other markets; natural disasters in Japan and Thailand during 2011 caused production interruptions and delays not just in Asia Pacific but other regions around the world; and episodes of increased geopolitical tensions or acts of terrorism have at times caused adverse reactions that may spread to economies around the globe. Concerns persist regarding the debt burden of certain countries that have adopted the euro currency (“euro area countries”) and the ability of these countries to meet future financial obligations, as well as concerns regarding the overall stability of the euro and the suitability of the euro as a single currency given the diverse economic and political circumstances of individual euro area countries. If a country within the euro area were to default on its debt or withdraw from the euro currency, or—in a more extreme circumstance—the euro currency were to be dissolved entirely, the impact on markets around the world, and on Ford’s global business, could be immediate and significant. Such a scenario—or the perception that such a development is imminent—could adversely affect the value of our euro-denominated assets and obligations. In addition, such a development could cause financial and capital markets within and outside Europe to constrict, thereby negatively impacting our ability to finance our business, and also could cause a substantial dip in consumer confidence and spending that could negatively impact sales of vehicles. Any one of these impacts could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. In addition, we have operations in various markets with volatile economic or political environments and are pursuing growth opportunities in a number of newly developed and emerging markets. These investments may expose us to heightened risks of economic, geopolitical, or other events, including governmental takeover (i.e., nationalization) of our manufacturing facilities or intellectual property, restrictive exchange or import controls, disruption of operations as a result of systemic political or economic instability, outbreak of war or expansion of hostilities, and acts of terrorism, each of which could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Further, the U.S. government and other governments could impose additional sanctions that could restrict us from doing business directly or indirectly in or with certain countries or parties, which could include affiliates. Economic distress of suppliers that may require Ford to provide substantial financial support or take other measures to ensure supplies of components or materials and could increase costs, affect liquidity, or cause production constraints or disruptions. The automotive industry supply base experienced increased economic distress due to the sudden and substantial drop in industry sales volumes beginning in 2008. Dramatically lower industry sales volume made existing debt obligations and fixed cost levels difficult for many suppliers to manage, increasing pressure on the supply base. As a result, suppliers not only were less willing to reduce prices, but some requested direct or indirect price increases as well as new and shorter payment terms. At times, we have had to provide financial assistance to key suppliers to ensure an uninterrupted supply of materials and components. In addition, where suppliers have exited certain lines of business or closed facilities due to the economic downturn or other reasons, we generally experience additional costs associated with transitioning to new suppliers. Each of these factors could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. 15 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 15 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 16 Work stoppages at Ford or supplier facilities or other limitations on production (whether as a result of labor disputes, natural or man-made disasters, tight credit markets or other financial distress, production constraints or difficulties, or other factors). A work stoppage or other limitation on production could occur at Ford or supplier facilities for any number of reasons, including as a result of disputes under existing collective bargaining agreements with labor unions or in connection with negotiation of new collective bargaining agreements, or as a result of supplier financial distress or other production constraints or difficulties, or for other reasons. Recent examples of situations that have affected industry production to varying degrees include: supplier financial distress due to reduced production volumes during the economic downturn in 2008–2009; capacity constraints as suppliers that restructured or downsized during the downturn work to satisfy growing industry volumes; short-term constraints on production as consumer preferences shift more fluidly across vehicle segments and features; and the impact on certain suppliers of natural disasters during 2011. As indicated, a work stoppage or other limitations on production at Ford or supplier facilities for any reason (including but not limited to labor disputes, natural or man-made disasters, tight credit markets or other financial distress, or production constraints or difficulties) could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Single-source supply of components or materials. Many components used in our vehicles are available only from a single supplier and cannot be re-sourced quickly or inexpensively to another supplier (due to long lead times, new contractual commitments that may be required by another supplier before ramping up to provide the components or materials, etc.). In addition to the general risks described above regarding interruption of supplies, which are exacerbated in the case of single-source suppliers, the exclusive supplier of a key component potentially could exert significant bargaining power over price, quality, warranty claims, or other terms relating to a component. Labor or other constraints on Ford’s ability to maintain competitive cost structure. Substantially all of the hourly employees in our Automotive operations in the United States and Canada are represented by unions and covered by collective bargaining agreements. We negotiated a four-year agreement with the UAW in 2011, and a fouryear agreement with the Canadian Auto Workers Union in 2012. Although we have negotiated transformational agreements in recent years, these agreements provide guaranteed wage and benefit levels throughout the contract term and some degree of employment security, subject to certain conditions. As a practical matter, these agreements may restrict our ability to close plants and divest businesses. A substantial number of our employees in other regions are represented by unions or government councils, and legislation or custom promoting retention of manufacturing or other employment in the state, country, or region may constrain as a practical matter our ability to sell or close manufacturing or other facilities. Substantial pension and postretirement health care and life insurance liabilities impairing liquidity or financial condition. We have defined benefit retirement plans in the United States that cover many of our hourly and salaried employees. We also provide pension benefits to non-U.S. employees and retirees, primarily in Europe. In addition, we and certain of our subsidiaries sponsor plans to provide other postretirement benefits (“OPEB”) for retired employees (primarily health care and life insurance benefits). See Note 12 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for more information about these plans. These benefit plans impose significant liabilities on us that are not fully funded and will require additional cash contributions, which could impair our liquidity. Our qualified U.S. defined benefit pension plans are subject to Title IV of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”). Under Title IV of ERISA, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (“PBGC”) has the authority under certain circumstances or upon the occurrence of certain events to terminate a qualified underfunded pension plan. One such circumstance is the occurrence of an event that unreasonably increases the risk of unreasonably large losses to the PBGC. Although we believe it is unlikely that the PBGC would terminate any of our plans, in the event that our qualified U.S. pension plans were terminated at a time when the liabilities of the plans exceeded the assets of the plans, we would incur a liability to the PBGC that could be equal to the entire amount of the underfunding. If our cash flows and capital resources were insufficient to fund our pension or OPEB obligations, we could be forced to reduce or delay investments and capital expenditures, suspend dividend payments, seek additional capital, or restructure or refinance our indebtedness. 16 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 16 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 17 Worse-than-assumed economic and demographic experience for postretirement benefit plans (e.g., discount rates or investment returns). The measurement of our obligations, costs, and liabilities associated with benefits pursuant to our postretirement benefit plans requires that we estimate the present value of projected future payments to all participants. We use many assumptions in calculating these estimates, including assumptions related to discount rates, investment returns on designated plan assets, and demographic experience (e.g., mortality and retirement rates). To the extent actual results are less favorable than our assumptions, there could be a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. For discussion of our assumptions, see “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 and Note 12 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. Restriction on use of tax attributes from tax law “ownership change.” Section 382 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code restricts the ability of a corporation that undergoes an ownership change to use its tax attributes, including net operating losses and tax credits (“Tax Attributes”). At December 31, 2014, we had Tax Attributes that would offset more than $15 billion of taxable income. For these purposes, an ownership change occurs if 5 percent shareholders of an issuer’s outstanding common stock, collectively, increase their ownership percentage by more than 50 percentage points over a rolling three-year period. In 2012, we renewed for an additional three-year period our tax benefit preservation plan (the “Plan”) to reduce the risk of an ownership change under Section 382. Under the Plan, shares held by any person who acquires, without the approval of our Board of Directors, beneficial ownership of 4.99% or more of our outstanding Common Stock could be subject to significant dilution. Our shareholders approved the renewal at our annual meeting in May 2013. The discovery of defects in vehicles resulting in delays in new model launches, recall campaigns, or increased warranty costs. Meeting or exceeding many government-mandated safety standards is costly and often technologically challenging, especially where standards may be in tension with the need to reduce vehicle weight in order to meet government-mandated emissions and fuel-economy standards. Government safety standards also require manufacturers to remedy defects related to vehicle safety through safety recall campaigns, and a manufacturer is obligated to recall vehicles if it determines that the vehicles do not comply with a safety standard. In addition, the introduction of new and innovative features and technology to our vehicles could increase the risk of defects or customer dissatisfaction. In 2014, there was an unprecedented increase in both the number of safety recalls by manufacturers in the United States and vehicles involved in those recalls due, in part, to significant public and governmental attention on the recall process at one of our domestic competitors and NHTSA’s expanded definition of safety defects. In addition, NHTSA’s enforcement strategy shifted to a significant increase in civil penalties levied and the use of consent orders requiring direct oversight by NHTSA of certain manufacturers’ safety processes, a trend that could continue. Should we or government safety regulators determine that a safety or other defect or a noncompliance exists with respect to certain of our vehicles prior to the start of production, the launch of such vehicle could be delayed until such defect is remedied. The costs associated with any protracted delay in new model launches necessary to remedy such defects, or the cost of recall campaigns or warranty costs to remedy such defects in vehicles that have been sold, could be substantial. These recall and warranty costs could be exacerbated to the extent they relate to global platforms. Furthermore, launch delays or recall actions also could adversely affect our reputation or market acceptance of our products as discussed above under “Lower-than-anticipated market acceptance of Ford’s new or existing products.” Increased safety, emissions, fuel economy, or other regulations resulting in higher costs, cash expenditures, and/or sales restrictions. The worldwide automotive industry is governed by a substantial amount of government regulation, which often differs by state, region, and country. Government regulation has arisen, and proposals for additional regulation are advanced, primarily out of concern for the environment (including concerns about the possibility of global climate change and its impact), vehicle safety, and energy independence. For example, as discussed above under “Item 1. Business - Governmental Standards,” in the United States the CAFE standards for light duty vehicles are 35.5 mpg by the 2016 model year, 45 mpg by the 2021 model year, and 54.5 mpg by the 2025 model year; EPA’s parallel CO2 emission regulations impose similar standards. California’s ZEV rules also mandate steep increases in the sale of electric vehicles and other advanced technology vehicles beginning in the 2018 model year. In addition, many governments regulate local product content and/or impose import requirements as a means of creating jobs, protecting domestic producers, and influencing the balance of payments. 17 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 17 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 18 In recent years, we have made significant changes to our product cycle plan to improve the overall fuel economy of vehicles we produce, thereby reducing their GHG emissions. There are limits on our ability to achieve fuel economy improvements over a given time frame, however, primarily relating to the cost and effectiveness of available technologies, consumer acceptance of new technologies and changes in vehicle mix, willingness of consumers to absorb the additional costs of new technologies, the appropriateness (or lack thereof) of certain technologies for use in particular vehicles, the widespread availability (or lack thereof) of supporting infrastructure for new technologies, and the human, engineering, and financial resources necessary to deploy new technologies across a wide range of products and powertrains in a short time. The current fuel economy, CO2, and ZEV standards will be difficult to meet if fuel prices remain relatively low and market conditions do not drive consumers to purchase electric vehicles and other highly fuel-efficient vehicles in large numbers. The cost to comply with existing government regulations is substantial, and future, additional regulations or changes in consumer preferences that affect vehicle mix could have a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. For more discussion of the impact of such standards on our global business, see the “Governmental Standards” discussion in “Item 1. Business” (“Item 1”) above. In addition, a number of governments, as well as non-governmental organizations, publicly assess vehicles to their own protocols. The protocols could change aggressively, and any negative perception regarding the performance of our vehicles subjected to such tests could reduce future sales. Unusual or significant litigation, governmental investigations, or adverse publicity arising out of alleged defects in products, perceived environmental impacts, or otherwise. We spend substantial resources ensuring that we comply with governmental safety regulations, mobile and stationary source emissions regulations, and other standards. Compliance with governmental standards, however, does not necessarily prevent individual or class actions, which can entail significant cost and risk. In certain circumstances, courts may permit tort claims even where our vehicles comply with federal and/or other applicable law. Furthermore, simply responding to actual or threatened litigation or government investigations of our compliance with regulatory standards, whether related to our products or business or commercial relationships, may require significant expenditures of time and other resources. Litigation also is inherently uncertain, and we could experience significant adverse results. In addition, adverse publicity surrounding an allegation may cause significant reputational harm that could have a significant adverse effect on our sales. A change in requirements under long-term supply arrangements committing Ford to purchase minimum or fixed quantities of certain parts, or to pay a minimum amount to the seller (“take-or-pay” contracts). We have entered into a number of long-term supply contracts that require us to purchase a fixed quantity of parts to be used in the production of our vehicles. If our need for any of these parts were to lessen, we could still be required to purchase a specified quantity of the part or pay a minimum amount to the seller pursuant to the take-or-pay contract, which could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations. Adverse effects on results from a decrease in or cessation or clawback of government incentives related to investments. We receive economic benefits from national, state, and local governments in various regions of the world in the form of incentives designed to encourage manufacturers to establish, maintain, or increase investment, workforce, or production. These incentives may take various forms, including grants, loan subsidies, and tax abatements or credits. The impact of these incentives can be significant in a particular market during a reporting period. For example, most of our manufacturing facilities in South America are located in Brazil, where the state or federal governments have historically offered, and continue to offer, significant incentives to manufacturers to encourage capital investment, increase manufacturing production, and create jobs. As a result, the performance of our South American operations has been impacted favorably by government incentives to a substantial extent as we have increased our investment and manufacturing presence in Brazil, and we expect this favorable impact to continue for the next several years. In Brazil, the federal government has levied assessments against us concerning our calculation of federal incentives we received, and certain states have challenged the grant to us of tax incentives by the state of Bahia, including a constitutional challenge of state incentives that is pending in Brazil’s Supreme Court. A decrease in, expiration without renewal of, or other cessation or clawback of government incentives for any of our business units, as a result of administrative decision or otherwise, could have a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for discussion of our accounting for government incentives, and “Item 3. Legal Proceedings” for discussion of tax proceedings in Brazil. Inherent limitations of internal controls impacting financial statements and safeguarding of assets. Our internal control over financial reporting and our operating internal controls may not prevent or detect misstatements or loss of assets because of inherent limitations, including the possibility of human error, the circumvention or overriding of controls, or fraud. Effective internal controls can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement accuracy and safeguarding of assets. 18 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 18 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 19 Cybersecurity risks to operational systems, security systems, or infrastructure owned by Ford, Ford Credit, or a third-party vendor or supplier. We are at risk for interruptions, outages, and breaches of: (i) operational systems (including business, financial, accounting, product development, consumer receivables, data processing, or manufacturing processes); (ii) facility security systems; and/or (iii) in-vehicle systems or mobile devices. Such cyber incidents could materially disrupt operational systems; result in loss of trade secrets or other proprietary or competitively sensitive information; compromise personally identifiable information of customers, employees, or others; jeopardize the security of our facilities; and/or affect the performance of in-vehicle systems. A cyber incident could be caused by malicious third parties using sophisticated, targeted methods to circumvent firewalls, encryption, and other security defenses, including hacking, fraud, trickery, or other forms of deception. The techniques used by third parties change frequently and may be difficult to detect for long periods of time. A significant cyber incident could harm our reputation and subject us to regulatory actions or litigation. Failure of financial institutions to fulfill commitments under committed credit and liquidity facilities. Under our Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of April 30, 2014 and as further amended (the “revolving credit facility”), we are able to borrow, repay, and then re-borrow up to $12.2 billion. Certain of our subsidiaries have standby or revolving credit facilities on which they depend for liquidity. If the financial institutions that provide these or other committed credit facilities were to default on their obligation to fund the commitments, these facilities would not be available to us, which could substantially adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition. For discussion of our Credit Agreement, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” in Item 7 and Note 13 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. Inability of Ford Credit to access debt, securitization, or derivative markets around the world at competitive rates or in sufficient amounts, due to credit rating downgrades, market volatility, market disruption, regulatory requirements, or other factors. Ford Credit’s ability to obtain unsecured funding at a reasonable cost is dependent on its credit ratings or its perceived creditworthiness. Ford Credit’s ability to obtain securitized funding under its committed asset-backed liquidity programs and certain other asset-backed securitization transactions is subject to having a sufficient amount of assets eligible for these programs, as well as Ford Credit’s ability to obtain appropriate credit ratings and, for certain committed programs, derivatives to manage the interest rate risk. Over time, and particularly in the event of any credit rating downgrades, market volatility, market disruption, or other factors, Ford Credit may reduce the amount of receivables it purchases or originates because of funding constraints. In addition, Ford Credit may be limited in the amount of receivables it purchases or originates in certain countries or regions if the local capital markets, particularly in developing countries, do not exist or are not adequately developed. Similarly, Ford Credit may reduce the amount of receivables it purchases or originates if there is a significant decline in the demand for the types of securities it offers or Ford Credit is unable to obtain derivatives to manage the interest rate risk associated with its securitization transactions. A significant reduction in the amount of receivables Ford Credit purchases or originates would significantly reduce its ongoing profits and could adversely affect its ability to support the sale of Ford vehicles. Higher-than-expected credit losses, lower-than-anticipated residual values, or higher-than-expected return volumes for leased vehicles. Credit risk is the possibility of loss from a customer’s or dealer’s failure to make payments according to contract terms. Credit risk (which is heavily dependent upon economic factors including unemployment, consumer debt service burden, personal income growth, dealer profitability, and used car prices) has a significant impact on Ford Credit’s business. The level of credit losses Ford Credit may experience could exceed its expectations and adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations. In addition, Ford Credit projects expected residual values (including residual value support payments from Ford) and return volumes for the vehicles it leases. Actual proceeds realized by Ford Credit upon the sale of returned leased vehicles at lease termination may be lower than the amount projected, which would reduce the profitability of the lease transaction. Among the factors that can affect the value of returned lease vehicles are the volume of vehicles returned, economic conditions, and quality or perceived quality, safety, fuel efficiency, or reliability of the vehicles. Actual return volumes may be higher than expected and can be influenced by contractual lease-end values relative to auction values, marketing programs for new vehicles, and general economic conditions. Each of these factors, alone or in combination, has the potential to adversely affect Ford Credit’s profitability if actual results were to differ significantly from Ford Credit’s projections. See “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 for additional discussion. 19 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 19 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 20 Increased competition from banks, financial institutions, or other third parties seeking to increase their share of financing Ford vehicles. No single company is a dominant force in the automotive finance industry. Most of Ford Credit’s bank competitors in the United States use credit aggregation systems that permit dealers to send, through standardized systems, retail credit applications to multiple finance sources to evaluate financing options offered by these sources. Also, direct on-line or large dealer group financing options provide consumers with alternative finance sources and/or increased pricing transparency. All of these financing alternatives drive greater competition based on financing rates. Competition from such institutions and alternative finance sources could adversely affect Ford Credit’s profitability and the volume of its retail business. In addition, Ford Credit may face increased competition on wholesale financing for Ford dealers. New or increased credit, consumer, or data protection or other regulations resulting in higher costs and/or additional financing restrictions. As a finance company, Ford Credit is highly regulated by governmental authorities in the locations in which it operates, which can impose significant additional costs and/or restrictions on its business. In the United States, for example, Ford Credit’s operations are subject to regulation, supervision, and licensing under various federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including the federal Truth-in-Lending Act, Equal Credit Opportunity Act, and Fair Credit Reporting Act. Congress also passed the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Financial Protection Act (“Act”) in 2010 to reform practices in the financial services industries, including automotive financing and securitizations. The Act directs federal agencies to adopt rules to regulate the consumer finance industry and the capital markets and, among other things, gives the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (“CFPB”) broad rule-making and enforcement authority for a wide range of consumer finance protection laws that regulate consumer finance businesses, such as Ford Credit’s retail automotive financing business. Exercise of these powers by the CFPB may increase the costs of, impose additional restrictions on, or otherwise adversely affect companies in the automotive finance business. For example, in March 2013, the CFPB issued a bulletin recommending that indirect vehicle lenders, a class that includes Ford Credit, take steps to monitor and/or impose controls over dealer discretionary pricing. In September 2014, the CFPB issued a proposed rule for the supervision of the largest nonbank automotive finance companies, such as Ford Credit. This is the initial step that is expected to lead to examinations of nonbank automotive finance companies for compliance with consumer finance protection laws as early as 2015. In addition, the Act provides that a non-bank financial company could be designated a “systemically important financial institution” by the Financial Stability Oversight Council and thus be subject to supervision by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Such a designation would mean that a non-bank finance company such as Ford Credit, in effect, could be regulated like a bank with respect to capital and other requirements, but without the benefits of being a bank—such as the ability to offer Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) insured deposits. The Act also creates an alternative liquidation framework under which the FDIC may be appointed as receiver of a non-bank financial company if the U.S. Treasury Secretary (in consultation with the President of the United States) determines that the company is in default or danger of default and the resolution of the company under other applicable law (e.g., U.S. bankruptcy law) would have serious adverse effects on the financial stability of the United States. The FDIC’s powers under this framework may vary from those of a bankruptcy court under U.S. bankruptcy law, which could adversely impact securitization markets, including Ford Credit’s funding activities, regardless of whether Ford Credit ever is determined to be subject to the Act’s alternative liquidation framework. In some countries outside the United States, some of Ford Credit’s subsidiaries are regulated banking institutions and are required, among other things, to maintain minimum capital reserves. In many other locations, governmental authorities require companies to have licenses in order to conduct financing businesses. Compliance with these laws and regulations imposes additional costs on Ford Credit and affects the conduct of its business. Additional regulation could add significant cost or operational constraints that might impair Ford Credit’s profitability.Key Economic Factors and Trends Affecting the Automotive Industry Currency Exchange Rate Volatility. The U.S. Federal Reserve has ended financial asset purchases, and the resulting shifts in capital flows have contributed to downward pressure on several emerging market currencies. In some cases that pressure is aggravated by high inflation, unstable policy environments, or both. Additionally, the yen and euro have depreciated as a result of policy changes by the Bank of Japan, and European Central Bank. The weak yen, in particular, adds significant potential downward pressure on vehicle pricing across many markets globally. In most markets, exchange rates are market-determined, and all are impacted by many different macroeconomic and policy factors, and thus likely to remain volatile. However, in some markets, exchange rates are heavily influenced or controlled by governments. Excess Capacity. According to IHS Automotive, an automotive research firm, the estimated automotive industry global production capacity for light vehicles of about 116 million units exceeded global production by about 29 million units in 2014. In North America and Europe, two regions where a significant share of industry revenue is earned, excess capacity as a percent of production in 2014 was an estimated 7% and 30%, respectively. In China, the auto industry also witnessed excess capacity at 45% of production in 2014, as manufacturers competed to capitalize on China’s future market potential. According to production capacity data projected by IHS Automotive, global excess capacity conditions could continue for several years at an average of about 32 million units per year during the period from 2015 to 2019. Pricing Pressure. Excess capacity, coupled with a proliferation of new products being introduced in key segments, will keep pressure on manufacturers’ ability to increase prices. In North America, the industry restructuring of the past few years has allowed manufacturers to better match production with demand, although Japanese and Korean manufacturers also have capacity located outside of the region directed to North America. In the future, Chinese and Indian manufacturers are expected to enter U.S. and European markets, further intensifying competition. Over the long term, intense competition and excess capacity will continue to put downward pressure on inflation-adjusted prices for similarly- 28 ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. OVERVIEW Revenue Our Automotive sector’s revenue is generated primarily by sales of vehicles, parts, and accessories; we generally treat sales and marketing incentives as a reduction to revenue. Revenue is recorded when all risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to our customers (generally, our dealers and distributors). For the majority of sales, this occurs when products are shipped from our manufacturing facilities. This is not the case, however, with respect to vehicles produced for sale to daily rental car companies that are subject to a guaranteed repurchase option. These vehicles are accounted for as operating leases, with lease revenue and profits recognized over the term of the lease. When we sell the returned vehicle at auction, we recognize a gain or loss on the difference, if any, between actual auction value and the projected auction value. Most of the vehicles sold by us to our dealers and distributors are financed at wholesale by Ford Credit. Upon Ford Credit originating the wholesale receivable related to a dealer’s purchase of a vehicle, Ford Credit pays cash to the relevant legal entity in our Automotive sector in payment of the dealer’s obligation for the purchase price of the vehicle. The dealer then pays the wholesale finance receivable to Ford Credit when it sells the vehicle to a retail customer. Our Financial Services sector’s revenue is generated primarily from interest on finance receivables, net of certain deferred origination costs that are included as a reduction of financing revenue, and such revenue is recognized over the term of the receivable using the interest method. Also, revenue from operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. Income is generated to the extent revenues exceed expenses, most of which are interest, depreciation, and operating expenses. Transactions between our Automotive and Financial Services sectors occur in the ordinary course of business. For example, we offer special retail financing and lease incentives to dealers’ customers who choose to finance or lease our vehicles from Ford Credit. The estimated cost for these incentives is recorded as revenue reduction to Automotive sales at the later of the date the related vehicle sales to our dealers are recorded or the date the incentive program is both approved and communicated. In order to compensate Ford Credit for the lower interest or lease rates offered to the retail customer, we pay the discounted value of the incentive directly to Ford Credit when it originates the retail finance or lease contract with the dealer’s customer. Ford Credit recognizes the amount over the life of retail finance contracts as an element of financing revenue and over the life of lease contracts as a reduction to depreciation. See Note 1 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for a more detailed discussion of transactions and payments between our Automotive and Financial Services sectors. Costs and Expenses Our income statement classifies our Automotive total costs and expenses into two categories: (i) cost of sales, and (ii) selling, administrative, and other expenses. We include within cost of sales those costs related to the development, manufacture, and distribution of our vehicles, parts, and accessories. Specifically, we include in cost of sales each of the following: material costs (including commodity costs); freight costs; warranty, including product recall and customer satisfaction program costs; labor and other costs related to the development and manufacture of our products; depreciation and amortization; and other associated costs. We include within selling, administrative, and other expenses labor and other costs not directly related to the development and manufacture of our products, including such expenses as advertising and sales promotion costs. Certain of our costs, such as material costs, generally vary directly with changes in volume and mix of production. In our industry, production volume often varies significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. Quarterly production volumes experience seasonal shifts throughout the year (including peak retail sales seasons, and the impact on production of model changeover and new product launches). As we have seen in recent years, annual production volumes are heavily impacted by external economic factors, including the pace of economic growth and factors such as the availability of consumer credit and cost of fuel. 29 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 29 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) 30 contented vehicles in the United States and contribute to a challenging pricing environment for the automotive industry. In Europe, the excess capacity situation was exacerbated by weakening demand and the lack of reductions in existing capacity, such that negative pricing pressure is expected to continue for the foreseeable future. Commodity and Energy Price Changes. The price of oil fell sharply in the second half of 2014, to below $50 per barrel, as demand was weaker than anticipated and global supply remained strong. Other commodity prices also have declined recently, but over the longer term prices are likely to trend higher given expectations for global demand growth. Vehicle Profitability. Our financial results depend on the profitability of the vehicles we sell, which may vary significantly by vehicle line. In general, larger vehicles tend to command higher prices and be more profitable than smaller vehicles, both across and within vehicle segments. For example, in North America, our larger, more profitable vehicles had an average contribution margin that was about 140% of our total average contribution margin across all vehicles, whereas our smaller vehicles had significantly lower contribution margins. Government regulations aimed at reducing emissions and increasing fuel efficiency may increase the cost of vehicles by more than the perceived benefit to the consumer. Given the backdrop of excess capacity, these regulations could dampen contribution margins. As we execute our One Ford plan, we are working to create best-in-class vehicles on global platforms that contribute higher margins, and offering a more balanced portfolio of vehicles with which we aim to be among the leaders in fuel efficiency in every segment in which we compete. Increasing Sales of Smaller Vehicles. Like other manufacturers, we are increasing our participation in newlydeveloped and emerging markets, such as Brazil, Russia, India, and China, in which vehicle sales are expected to increase at a faster rate than in most mature markets. The largest segments in these markets are small vehicles (i.e., Sub-B, B, and C segments). To increase our participation in these fast-growing markets, we are significantly increasing our production capacity, directly or through joint ventures. Although we expect positive contribution margins from higher small vehicle sales, one result of increased production of small vehicles may be that, over time, our average per unit margin decreases because small vehicles tend to have lower margins than medium and large vehicles. Trade Policy. To the extent governments in various regions erect or intensify barriers to imports, or implement currency policy that advantages local exporters selling into the global marketplace, there can be a significant negative impact on manufacturers based in markets that promote free trade. While we believe the long-term trend is toward the growth of free trade, we have noted with concern recent developments in a number of regions. In Asia Pacific Africa, for example, the recent dramatic depreciation of the yen significantly reduces the cost of exports into the United States, Europe, and other global markets by Japanese manufacturers. Over a period of time, the emerging weakness of the yen can contribute to other countries pursuing weak currency policies by intervening in the exchange rate markets. This is particularly likely in other Asian countries, such as South Korea. As another example, government actions in South America to incentivize local production and balance trade are driving trade frictions between South American countries and also with Mexico, resulting in business environment instability and new trade barriers. We will continue to monitor and address developing issues around trade policy. Other Economic Factors. During 2014, mature market government bond yields and inflation were lower than expected, and there is a rising risk of persistent disinflation and, in some markets, even outright deflation. The lower levels of inflation and interest rates were unexpected partially because they have occurred against a backdrop of loose monetary policy and high levels of mature market deficits and debt. The eventual implications of higher government deficits and debt, with potentially higher long-term interest rates, may still drive a higher cost of capital over our planning period. Higher interest rates and/or taxes to address the higher deficits also may impede real growth in gross domestic product and, therefore, vehicle sales over our planning period. For additional information on our assessment of the business environment, refer to the “Outlook” section below. 30 CREC00022_2014AR_Financials_R05.indd 30 3/10/15 2:00 AM Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) 31 Trends and Strategies Our priorities are: (1) accelerate the pace of progress of our One Ford plan, (2) deliver product excellence with passion, and (3) drive innovation in every part of our business. 
tem 1. Business
General Motors Company (sometimes referred to as 搘e,?搊ur,?搖s,?搊urselves,?the 揅ompany,?揋eneral Motors,?or 揋M") was incorporated as a Delaware corporation in 2009. We design, build and sell cars, trucks and automobile parts worldwide. We also provide automotive financing services through General Motors Financial Company, Inc. (GM Financial).

Automotive

Our automotive operations meet the demands of our customers through our four automotive segments: GM North America (GMNA), GM Europe (GME), GM International Operations (GMIO) and GM South America (GMSA). Our total worldwide retail vehicle sales were 9.9 million, 9.7 million and 9.3 million including sales by joint ventures on a total vehicle basis, not based on the percentage ownership in the joint venture in the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012.

GMNA primarily meets the demands of customers in North America with vehicles developed, manufactured and/or marketed under the Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet and GMC brands. The demands of customers outside North America are primarily met with vehicles developed, manufactured and/or marketed under the Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet, GMC, Holden, Opel and Vauxhall brands. We also have equity ownership stakes directly or indirectly in entities through various regional subsidiaries, primarily in Asia. These companies design, manufacture and market vehicles under the Alpheon, Baojun, Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet, Jiefang and Wuling brands.

In addition to the products we sell to our dealers for consumer retail sales, we also sell cars and trucks to fleet customers, including daily rental car companies, commercial fleet customers, leasing companies and governments. We sell vehicles to fleet customers directly or through our network of dealers. Our retail and fleet customers can obtain a wide range of aftersale vehicle services and products through our dealer network, such as maintenance, light repairs, collision repairs, vehicle accessories and extended service warranties.

Competitive Position

The global automotive industry is highly competitive. The principal factors that determine consumer vehicle preferences in the markets in which we operate include price, quality, available options, style, safety, reliability, fuel economy and functionality. Market leadership in individual countries in which we compete varies widely.

Vehicle Sales

We present both wholesale and retail vehicle sales data to assist in the analysis of our revenue and our market share. We do not currently export vehicles to Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Sudan or Syria. Accordingly, these countries are excluded from industry sales data in the tables below and corresponding calculations of our market share.

Wholesale Vehicle Sales

Wholesale vehicle sales data, which represents sales directly to dealers and others, is the measure that correlates vehicle sales to our revenue from the sale of vehicles, which is the largest component of automotive Net sales and revenue. Wholesale vehicle sales exclude vehicles produced by unconsolidated joint ventures. In the year ended December 31, 2014, 52.9% of our wholesale vehicle sales volume was generated outside the U.S. The following table summarizes total wholesale vehicle sales of new vehicles by automotive segment (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years ended December 31,
 
2014
 
2013
 
2012
GMNA
3,320

 
55.0
%
 
3,276

 
51.1
%
 
3,207

 
49.8
%
GME
1,172

 
19.4
%
 
1,163

 
18.1
%
 
1,231

 
19.1
%
GMIO
655

 
10.9
%
 
921

 
14.4
%
 
957

 
14.8
%
GMSA
886

 
14.7
%
 
1,053

 
16.4
%
 
1,050

 
16.3
%
Worldwide
6,033

 
100.0
%
 
6,413

 
100.0
%
 
6,445

 
100.0
%


1


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Retail Vehicle Sales

Retail vehicle sales data, which represents estimated sales to the end customer, including fleets, does not correlate directly to the revenue we recognize during the period. However, retail vehicle sales data is indicative of the underlying demand for our vehicles, is the basis for our market share, and is based upon the good faith estimates of management. Retail vehicle sales data includes sales by joint ventures on a total vehicle basis, not based on the percentage of ownership in the joint venture. Certain joint venture agreements in China allow for the contractual right to report vehicle sales of non-GM trademarked vehicles by those joint ventures. Market share information is based primarily on retail vehicle sales volume, but estimates may be used where retail vehicle sales volume is not available.

In countries where end customer data is not readily available other data sources, such as wholesale or forecast volumes, are used to estimate retail vehicle sales. Certain fleet sales that are accounted for as operating leases are included in retail vehicle sales at the time of delivery to the daily rental car companies. The following table summarizes total industry retail sales volume, or estimated sales volume where retail sales volume is not available, of new vehicles and the related competitive position by geographic region (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2014
 
2013
 
2012
 
Industry
 
GM
 
GM as
a % of
Industry
 
Industry
 
GM
 
GM as
a % of
Industry
 
Industry
 
GM
 
GM as
a % of
Industry
North America
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
United States
16,858

 
2,935

 
17.4
%
 
15,894

 
2,786

 
17.5
%
 
14,794

 
2,596

 
17.5
%
Other
3,379

 
478

 
14.1
%
 
3,201

 
448

 
14.0
%
 
3,041

 
423

 
13.9
%
Total North America
20,237

 
3,413

 
16.9
%
 
19,095

 
3,234

 
16.9
%
 
17,835

 
3,019

 
16.9
%
Europe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Germany
3,357

 
237

 
7.1
%
 
3,258

 
242

 
7.4
%
 
3,394

 
254

 
7.5
%
United Kingdom
2,845

 
305

 
10.7
%
 
2,597

 
301

 
11.6
%
 
2,335

 
272

 
11.7
%
Russia
2,541

 
189

 
7.4
%
 
2,834

 
258

 
9.1
%
 
3,006

 
288

 
9.6
%
Other
9,988

 
525

 
5.3
%
 
9,715

 
592

 
6.1
%
 
9,878

 
655

 
6.6
%
Total Europe
18,731

 
1,256

 
6.7
%
 
18,404

 
1,393

 
7.6
%
 
18,613

 
1,469

 
7.9
%
Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
China
23,861

 
3,540

 
14.8
%
 
22,202

 
3,160

 
14.2
%
 
19,394

 
2,836

 
14.6
%
Other
19,119

 
838

 
4.4
%
 
19,117

 
898

 
4.7
%
 
19,113

 
919

 
4.8
%
Total Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa
42,980

 
4,378

 
10.2
%
 
41,319

 
4,058

 
9.8
%
 
38,507

 
3,755

 
9.7
%
South America
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Brazil
3,498

 
579

 
16.6
%
 
3,767

 
650

 
17.3
%
 
3,802

 
643

 
16.9
%
Other
1,803

 
299

 
16.6
%
 
2,173

 
387

 
17.8
%
 
2,044

 
408

 
20.0
%
Total South America
5,301

 
878

 
16.6
%
 
5,940

 
1,037

 
17.5
%
 
5,846

 
1,051

 
18.0
%
Total Worldwide
87,249

 
9,925

 
11.4
%
 
84,758

 
9,722

 
11.5
%
 
80,801

 
9,294

 
11.5
%
United States
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cars
7,688

 
1,085

 
14.1
%
 
7,556

 
1,067

 
14.1
%
 
7,174

 
1,031

 
14.4
%
Trucks
4,753

 
1,113

 
23.4
%
 
4,247

 
998

 
23.5
%
 
3,946

 
933

 
23.7
%
Crossovers
4,417

 
737

 
16.7
%
 
4,091

 
721

 
17.6
%
 
3,674

 
632

 
17.2
%
Total U.S.
16,858

 
2,935

 
17.4
%
 
15,894

 
2,786

 
17.5
%
 
14,794

 
2,596

 
17.5
%


2


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

The following table summarizes the vehicle sales at our China joint ventures (China JVs) that are included in our retail vehicle sales (vehicles in thousands):    
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2014
 
2013
 
2012
SAIC General Motors Sales Co., Ltd. (SGMS)
1,710

 
1,515

 
1,331

SAIC-GM-Wuling Automobile Co., Ltd. and FAW-GM Light Duty Commercial Vehicle Co., Ltd.
1,830

 
1,644

 
1,501


In the year ended December 31, 2014 we estimate we had the largest market share in North America and South America, the number six market share in Europe and the number two market share in the Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa region. In the year ended December 31, 2014 the Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa region was our largest region by retail vehicle sales volume and represented 44.1% of our global retail vehicle sales.

Our retail vehicle sales volumes in the year ended December 31, 2014 grew at a slightly slower pace than the overall industry, resulting in a 0.1% industry share decline. All new and refreshed vehicles gained share in 2014, but were outpaced by losses on vehicles that were late in their lifecycle, largely due to an aggressive competitive environment. Our retail vehicle sales volumes in the year ended December 31, 2013 reflect continued recovery in the U.S. despite an intense competitive environment. Growth was largely attributed to new or refreshed models. Our retail vehicle sales volumes in the year ended December 31, 2012 reflect an intensified competitive environment in the U.S., including aggressive competitor pricing and media spending, as well as key competitor new product launches.

Fleet Sales and Deliveries

The sales and market share data provided previously includes both retail and fleet vehicle sales. Certain fleet transactions, particularly daily rental, are generally less profitable than retail sales. A significant portion of the sales to daily rental car companies are recorded as operating leases under U.S. GAAP with no recognition of revenue at the date of initial delivery due to guaranteed repurchase obligations. The following table summarizes estimated fleet sales and those sales as a percentage of total retail vehicle sales (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2014
 
2013
 
2012
GMNA
814

 
758

 
775

GME
505

 
490

 
500

GMIO
414

 
415

 
408

GMSA
176

 
184

 
190

Total fleet sales
1,909

 
1,847

 
1,873

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fleet sales as a percentage of total retail vehicle sales
19.2
%
 
19.0
%
 
20.2
%

The following table summarizes U.S. fleet sales and those sales as a percentage of total U.S. retail vehicle sales (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2014
 
2013
 
2012
Daily rental sales
450

 
439

 
431

Other fleet sales
254

 
217

 
242

Total fleet sales
704

 
656

 
673

Fleet sales as a percentage of total U.S. retail vehicle sales
 
 
 
 
 
Cars
29.5
%
 
26.4
%
 
30.6
%
Trucks
21.8
%
 
24.2
%
 
25.3
%
Crossovers
19.1
%
 
18.6
%
 
19.2
%
Total vehicles
24.0
%
 
23.6
%
 
25.9
%


3


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Product Pricing

Several methods are used to promote our products, including the use of dealer, retail and fleet incentives such as customer rebates and finance rate support. The level of incentives is dependent in large part upon the level of competition in the markets in which we operate and the level of demand for our products. In 2015 we will continue to price vehicles competitively, including offering strategic and tactical incentives as required. We believe this strategy, coupled with sound inventory management, will continue to strengthen the reputation of our brands and result in competitive prices.

Cyclical Nature of Business

Retail sales are cyclical and production varies from month to month. Vehicle model changeovers occur throughout the year as a result of new market entries. The market for vehicles depends on general economic conditions, credit availability and consumer spending.

Relationship with Dealers

We market vehicles worldwide primarily through a network of independent authorized retail dealers. These outlets include distributors, dealers and authorized sales, service and parts outlets.

The following table summarizes the number of authorized dealerships:
 
December 31, 2014
 
December 31, 2013
 
December 31, 2012
GMNA
4,908

 
4,946

 
5,015

GME
6,633

 
7,087

 
7,574

GMIO
7,699

 
7,472

 
6,915

GMSA
1,272

 
1,201

 
1,250

Total worldwide
20,512

 
20,706

 
20,754


We and our joint ventures enter into a contract with each authorized dealer agreeing to sell to the dealer one or more specified product lines at wholesale prices and granting the dealer the right to sell those vehicles to retail customers from an approved location. Our dealers often offer more than one GM brand at a single dealership in a number of our markets in order to enhance dealer profitability. Authorized dealers offer parts, accessories, service and repairs for GM vehicles in the product lines that they sell using GM parts and accessories. Our dealers are authorized to service GM vehicles under our limited warranty program and those repairs are to be made only with GM parts. Our dealers generally provide their customers access to credit or lease financing, vehicle insurance and extended service contracts provided by GM Financial, Ally Financial, Inc. (Ally Financial) and other financial institutions.

The quality of GM dealerships and our relationship with our dealers and distributors are critical to our success as dealers maintain the primary sales and service interface with the end consumer of our products. In addition to the terms of our contracts with our dealers we are regulated by various country and state franchise laws that may supersede those contractual terms and impose specific regulatory requirements and standards for initiating dealer network changes, pursuing terminations for cause and other contractual matters.

Research, Product Development and Intellectual Property

Costs for research, manufacturing engineering, product engineering and design and development activities relate primarily to developing new products or services or improving existing products or services including activities related to vehicle emissions control, improved fuel economy and the safety of drivers and passengers. In the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 research and development expenses were $7.4 billion, $7.2 billion and $7.4 billion.

One of our priorities for research is to continue to develop and advance our alternative propulsion strategy because energy diversity and environmental leadership are critical elements of our overall business strategy. Our objective is to be the recognized industry leader in fuel efficiency through the development of a wide variety of technologies to reduce petroleum consumption.

Fuel Efficiency


4


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

We are fully committed to improving fuel efficiency and meeting regulatory standards through a combination of strategies including: (1) extensive technology improvements to conventional powertrains; (2) increased use of smaller displacement engines and improved and advanced automatic transmissions; and (3) vehicle improvements including increased use of lighter, front-wheel drive architectures.

Alternative Fuel Vehicles

We believe alternative fuels offer the greatest near-term potential to reduce liquid petroleum consumption in the transportation sector. Leveraging experience and capability developed around these technologies in our global operations we continue to develop FlexFuel vehicles that can run on gasoline-ethanol blend fuels as well as vehicles that run on compressed natural gas (CNG) and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG).

We currently offer 13 FlexFuel vehicles in the U.S. for the 2015 model year plus an additional four models to fleet and commercial customers capable of operating on gasoline, E85 ethanol or any combination of the two. We continue to study the future role FlexFuel vehicles may play in the U.S. in light of recent regulatory developments and the rate of development of the refueling infrastructure. In Brazil a substantial majority of vehicles sold were FlexFuel vehicles capable of running on 100% ethanol blends. We also market FlexFuel vehicles in Australia, Thailand and other global markets where biofuels have emerged in the marketplace.

We produce CNG bi-fuel capable vehicles in Europe such as the Opel Zafira and in the U.S. with the Chevrolet Express and GMC Savana full-size vans (fleet and commercial customers) and the Chevrolet Silverado and GMC Sierra 2500 HD pick-up trucks (commercial and retail customers) that are capable of switching between gasoline or diesel and CNG. In addition we recently launched the CNG bi-fuel Chevrolet Impala full-size sedan to both fleet and retail markets in the U.S. We offer LPG capable vehicles globally in select markets reflecting the infrastructure, regulatory focus and natural resource availability of the markets in which they are sold.

We support the development of biodiesel blend fuels, which are alternative diesel fuels produced from renewable sources, and we provide biodiesel capabilities in other markets reflecting the availability of biodiesel blend fuels.

Hybrid, Plug-In, Extended Range and Battery Electric Vehicles

We are investing significantly in multiple technologies offering increasing levels of vehicle electrification including eAssist, plug-in hybrid, extended range and battery electric vehicles. We currently offer seven models in the U.S. featuring some form of electrification and continue to develop plug-in hybrid electric vehicle technology (PHEV) and extended range electric vehicles such as the Chevrolet Volt, Opel Ampera and Cadillac ELR. In 2014 we introduced the Cadillac ELR extended range luxury coupe and introduced a second-generation Chevrolet Volt at the 2015 North American International Auto Show. The next-generation Chevrolet Volt symbolizes our continued commitment to expansion of vehicle electrification and the development of accompanying electrification technologies including battery systems, electric motors and advanced electronic controls.

Hydrogen Fuel Cell Technology

As part of our long-term strategy to reduce petroleum consumption and greenhouse gas emissions we are committed to continuing development of our hydrogen fuel cell technology. Our Chevrolet Equinox fuel cell electric vehicle demonstration programs, such as Project Driveway, have accumulated more than 3 million miles of real-world driving by consumers, celebrities, business partners and government agencies. These programs are helping us identify consumer and infrastructure needs to understand the business case for potential production of this technology.

GM and Honda entered into a long-term agreement to co-develop a next-generation fuel cell system and hydrogen storage technologies, aiming for the 2020 timeframe. The collaboration expects to succeed by sharing expertise, economies of scale and common sourcing strategies and builds upon GM's and Honda抯 strengths as leaders in hydrogen fuel cell technology.
 
OnStar, LLC

OnStar, LLC (OnStar) is a wholly-owned subsidiary of GM serving more than 6.8 million subscribers in the U.S., Canada, Mexico and, through a joint venture, China, with expectations to expand to Europe. OnStar is a provider of connected safety, security and mobility solutions and advanced information technology and is available on the majority of our 2015 model year vehicles. OnStar's key services include automatic crash response, stolen vehicle assistance, remote door unlock, turn-by-turn navigation, vehicle diagnostics, hands-free calling and 4G LTE wireless connectivity.

5


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


OnStar has developed a system based on the findings of a Center for Disease Control and Prevention expert panel which allows OnStar advisors to alert first responders when a vehicle crash is likely to have caused serious injury to the occupants. OnStar also offers a mobile application to provide subscribers with up-to-date vehicle information such as oil level, tire pressure and fuel level as well as providing remote start, remote door unlock and navigation services from a mobile phone.

Product Development

Our vehicle development activities are integrated into a single global organization. This strategy builds on earlier efforts to consolidate and standardize our approach to vehicle development. We define a global architecture as a specific range of performance characteristics and dimensions supporting a common set of major underbody components and subsystems with common interfaces.

A centralized organization is responsible for many of the non-visible parts of the vehicle such as steering, suspension, the brake system, the heating, ventilation and air conditioning system and the electrical system. This team works very closely with the global architecture development teams around the world, who are responsible for components that are unique to each brand, such as exterior and interior design, tuning of the vehicle to meet the brand character requirements and final validation to meet applicable government requirements.

Intellectual Property

We generate and hold a significant number of patents in a number of countries in connection with the operation of our business. While none of these patents by itself is material to our business as a whole, these patents are very important to our operations and continued technological development. We hold a number of trademarks and service marks that are very important to our identity and recognition in the marketplace.

Raw Materials, Services and Supplies

We purchase a wide variety of raw materials, parts, supplies, energy, freight, transportation and other services from numerous suppliers for use in the manufacture of our products. The raw materials are primarily composed of steel, aluminum, resins, copper, lead and platinum group metals. We have not experienced any significant shortages of raw materials and normally do not carry substantial inventories of such raw materials in excess of levels reasonably required to meet our production requirements.

In some instances, we purchase systems, components, parts and supplies from a single source and may be at an increased risk for supply disruptions. The inability or unwillingness of these sources to supply us with parts and supplies could have a material adverse effect on our production capacity. Total purchases from our two largest suppliers have ranged from approximately 10% to 11% of our total purchases from 2012 to 2014.

Environmental and Regulatory Matters

Automotive Emissions Control

We are subject to laws and regulations that require us to control automotive emissions, including vehicle exhaust emission standards, vehicle evaporative emission standards and onboard diagnostic (OBD) system requirements. Advanced OBD systems are used to identify and diagnose problems with emission control systems. Problems detected by the OBD system may increase warranty costs and the chance for recall. Emission and OBD requirements become more challenging each year as vehicles must meet lower emission standards and new diagnostics are required and will continue to become even more stringent throughout the world.

U.S. and Canada

The U.S. federal government imposes stringent emission control requirements on vehicles sold in the U.S. and additional requirements are imposed by various state governments. Canada抯 federal government vehicle criteria emission requirements are generally aligned with the U.S. federal requirements. These requirements include vehicle exhaust emission standards, vehicle evaporative emission standards and OBD system requirements. Each model year we must obtain certification for each test group that our vehicles will meet emission requirements from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) before we can sell vehicles in the U.S. and Canada and from the California Air Resources Board (CARB) before we can sell vehicles in California and other states that have adopted the California emissions requirements.

6


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


While we believe all our products are in compliance with EPA and CARB certification requirements, both agencies have ongoing 搃n-use?evaluations of compliance for products from all manufacturers. It is possible that we or either agency could identify potential non-compliance, which could lead to some type of field action to remedy the issue. Testing includes pre-production testing of vehicles as part of certification and in-use testing of customer vehicles at specified mileages.

CARB has adopted its next round of emission requirements which phase in with the 2015 model year. These requirements include more stringent exhaust emission and evaporative emission standards including an increase in zero emission vehicles (ZEV) such as electric vehicles or hydrogen fuel cell vehicles. CARB has adopted 2018 model year and later requirements for increasing volumes of ZEVs to achieve greenhouse gas as well as criteria pollutant emission reductions to help achieve the state's long-term greenhouse gas reduction goals. The EPA has adopted similar exhaust emission and evaporative emission standards which phase in with the 2017 model year. These new requirements will also increase the time and mileage periods over which manufacturers are responsible for a vehicle's emission performance.

The Clean Air Act permits states that have areas with air quality compliance issues to adopt the California car and light-duty truck emission standards in lieu of the federal requirements. Thirteen states currently have these standards in effect and 10 of these 13 states have adopted the ZEV requirements.

Europe

Emissions are regulated by two different entities: the European Commission (EC) and the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE). The EC imposes harmonized emission control requirements on vehicles sold in all 28 European Union (EU) Member States and other countries apply regulations under the framework of the UNECE. We must demonstrate that vehicles will meet emission requirements from an approval authority before we can sell vehicles in the EU Member States. The regulatory requirements include random testing of newly assembled vehicles and a manufacturer in-use surveillance program. EU and UNECE requirements are equivalent in terms of stringency and implementation.

A new level of exhaust emission standards for cars and light-duty trucks, Euro 5, was effective in 2011. Future European emission standards focus particularly on further reducing emissions from diesel vehicles. The Euro 6 emission levels will become effective in 2017. The new requirements will require additional technologies and further increase the cost of diesel engines, which currently cost more than gasoline engines. To comply with Euro 6 standards we expect that we will need to implement technologies identical to those being developed to meet U.S. emission standards. These technologies will put additional cost pressures on the already challenging European market for small and mid-size diesel vehicles. Gasoline engines are also affected by the new requirements. The measures for gasoline vehicles that require technology to reduce exhaust pollutant emissions will have adverse effects on vehicle fuel economy which drives additional technology cost to maintain fuel economy.

In the long-term, notwithstanding the already low vehicle emissions in Europe, the EC will continue devising regulatory requirements on the emission test cycle, real driving emission, low temperature testing, fuel evaporation and OBD. We are currently in compliance with all material components of these requirements or expect to be in compliance by the required date.

China

China has implemented European type China 4 standards nationally with European OBD requirements nationwide for all newly registered vehicles. Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou each required China 5 standards by the end of 2014 for newly registered vehicles. Tianjin, Hebei Province, the Pearl River and the Yangtze River delta regions are each expected to require China 5 standards prior to nationwide implementation of China 5 in 2017. The Beijing municipality is currently considering the implementation of a China unique emission standard for China 6 with the potential to combine elements of European and U.S. standards as early as 2017. We are currently in compliance with all material components of these requirements or expect to be in compliance by the required date.

Automotive Fuel Economy

U.S.

Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) reporting is required for three separate fleets: domestically produced cars, imported cars and light-duty trucks. Both car and light-duty truck standards were established using targets for various vehicle sizes and vehicle model sales volumes. In 2015 our domestic car standard is estimated to be 34.8 mpg, our import car standard is estimated

7


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

at 38.4 mpg, and our light-duty truck standard is estimated to be 25.6 mpg. Our current product plan is expected to be compliant with the federal CAFE program through the 2015 model year. In addition to federal CAFE the U.S. EPA requires compliance with greenhouse gas requirements that are similar to the CAFE program. Our current product plan is expected to be compliant with the federal greenhouse gas program through the 2015 model year. CARB has agreed that compliance with the federal program is deemed to be compliant with the California program for the 2012 through 2016 model years.

Europe

Legislation regulating fleet average CO2 emissions was implemented for passenger cars in 2012 with full compliance required by 2015. Requirements must be met through the introduction of CO2 reducing technologies on conventional engines or ultra-low CO2 vehicles such as the Chevrolet Volt and Opel Ampera. The EU has adopted an even more stringent CO2 regulation as of 2020. Along with the passenger car target, the EU also adopted a new fleet average target as of 2020. We are developing a compliance plan by adopting operational CO2 targets for each market entry in Europe.

Effective in 2012 an EC regulation required low-rolling resistance tires, tire pressure monitoring systems and gear shift indicators. An additional EC regulation has been adopted that will require labeling of tires for noise, fuel efficiency and rolling resistance, affecting vehicles at the point of sale as well as the sale of tires in the aftermarket.

China

China has both an individual vehicle pass-fail type approval requirement based on Phase 2 standards and a fleet fuel consumption requirement based on Phase 3 standards based on vehicle curb weight for the 2012 through 2015 calendar years. Implementation began in 2012 with full compliance to 6.9L/100km required by 2015. China has continued subsidies for fuel efficient vehicles, plug-in hybrid, battery electric and fuel cell vehicles. China is now working on a more aggressive Phase 4 fleet fuel consumption standard that is expected to apply beginning in 2016, with full compliance to 5.0L/100km required by 2020.

Industrial Environmental Control

Environmental Matters

Our operations are subject to a wide range of environmental protection laws including those laws regulating air emissions, water discharges, waste management and environmental cleanup. Certain environmental statutes require that responsible parties fund remediation actions regardless of fault, legality of original disposal or ownership of a disposal site. Under certain circumstances these laws impose joint and several liability as well as liability for related damages to natural resources. Refer to Note 17 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information on environmental matters including site remediation.

To mitigate the effects our worldwide operations have on the environment we are committed to convert as many of our worldwide facilities as possible to landfill-free facilities. At December 31, 2014, 88 (or approximately 50%) of our manufacturing facilities were landfill-free facilities. Additionally we have 34 non-manufacturing facilities that are landfill free. At our landfill-free manufacturing facilities approximately 93% of waste materials are recycled or reused and 6% is converted to energy at waste-to-energy facilities. Including construction, demolition and remediation wastes, we estimate that we recycled, reused, or composted over 2 million metric tons of waste materials at our global manufacturing operations and estimate that we converted approximately 100,000 metric tons of waste materials to energy at waste-to-energy facilities in the year ended December 31, 2014.

In addition to providing environmental benefits our landfill-free program and total waste reduction commitments generate revenue from the sale of production by-products, reduce our carbon footprint, and help to reduce the risks and financial liabilities associated with waste disposal.

We continue to search for ways to increase our use of renewable energy and improve our energy efficiency. At December 31, 2014 we have implemented projects globally that have increased our renewable energy capacity by over 35 megawatts, bringing our total renewable energy capacity to over 100 megawatts. In 2014 we also met the Environmental Protection Agency Energy Star Challenge for Industry at an additional 14 of our sites globally by reducing energy intensity an average of 17%. To meet the EPA challenge industrial sites must reduce energy intensity by 10% in five years or fewer. All 14 sites achieved the goal in no more than four years, with most meeting it in less than two years, bringing the total number of GM-owned sites to have met the Energy Star Challenge to 70.
 
Chemical Regulations

8


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


We continually monitor the implementation of chemical regulations to maintain compliance and evaluate their effect on our business, suppliers and the automotive industry.
 
U.S. and Canada

Governmental agencies in both the U.S. and Canada continue to introduce new regulations and legislation related to the selection and use of chemicals or substances of concern by mandating broad prohibitions, green chemistry, life cycle analysis and product stewardship initiatives. These initiatives give broad regulatory authority to ban or restrict the use of certain chemical substances and potentially affect automobile manufacturers' responsibilities for vehicle components at the end of a vehicle's life, as well as, chemical selection for product development and manufacturing. Chemical restrictions in Canada are progressing more rapidly than in the U.S. as a result of Environment Canada抯 Chemical Management Plan to assess existing substances and implement risk management controls on any chemical deemed toxic. These emerging regulations will potentially lead to increases in costs and supply chain complexity. We are currently in compliance with all material components of these requirements or expect to be in compliance by the required date.

The U.S. Congress is currently pursuing an update of the Toxic Substances Control Act to grant the EPA more authority to regulate and ban chemicals from use in the U.S. which, if passed, is expected to greatly increase the level of regulation of chemicals in vehicles.

Europe

In 2007 the EU implemented its regulatory requirements, the EU REACH regulation among others, to register, evaluate, authorize and restrict the use of chemical substances. This regulation requires chemical substances manufactured in or imported into the EU to be registered with the European Chemicals Agency before 2018. Under this regulation, 搒ubstances of very high concern?may either require authorization for further use or may be restricted in the future. This could potentially increase the cost of certain alternative substances that are used to manufacture vehicles and parts, or result in a supply chain disruption when a substance is no longer available to meet production timelines. Our research and development initiatives may be diverted to address future requirements. We are currently in compliance with all material components of these requirements or expect to be in compliance by the required date.

Safety

In the U.S. if a vehicle or vehicle equipment does not comply with a safety standard or if a vehicle defect creates an unreasonable safety risk the manufacturer is required to notify owners and provide a remedy. We are required to report certain information relating to certain customer complaints, warranty claims, field reports and notices and claims involving property damage, injuries and fatalities in the U.S. and claims involving fatalities outside the U.S. We are also required to report certain information concerning safety recalls and other safety campaigns outside the U.S.

Outside the U.S. safety standards and recall regulations often have the same purpose as the U.S. standards but may differ in their requirements and test procedures. Other countries sometimes pass regulations which are more stringent than U.S. standards. Refer to Note 13 for more information on significant recall activities in 2014.

Vehicular Noise Control

In the U.S. passenger cars and light-duty trucks are subject to state and local motor vehicle noise regulations. We identify the most stringent state and local requirements and validate to those requirements. Medium to heavy-duty trucks are regulated at the federal level.

Outside the U.S. noise regulations have been established by authorities at the national and supranational level. We believe that our vehicles meet all applicable noise regulations in the markets where they are sold. In 2014 the EU published a directive that mandates a significant decrease in vehicle noise emissions with a mandatory application beginning in 2016. The directive of the EU also forms the basis for amendment to UNECE vehicle regulations, with the effect that maximum noise regulations will become more stringent in all markets outside of North America.

While current noise emission requirements regulate maximum allowable noise levels, formal proposals are under development to regulate minimum sound levels. These proposals stem from concern that relatively quiet vehicles, specifically hybrids and

9


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

electrics, may not be readily heard by pedestrians. In the U.S., National Highway Transportation Safety Administration (NHTSA) issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in January 2013 and the U.S. Department of Transportation indicated a final rule is expected to be published in 2015. The UNECE is developing a Global Technical Regulation, sponsored by the U.S., Japan, and the EU, for manufacturers to equip vehicles with pedestrian alerting devices where the vehicle fails to meet minimum sound emission levels.

Automotive Financing - GM Financial

GM Financial is our global captive automotive finance company. GM Financial conducts its business in North America and, as a result of the 2013 acquisition of the Ally Financial international operations, in Europe and Latin America. Latin America includes operations located in Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico. In January 2015 GM Financial completed the acquisition of Ally Financial's equity interest in SAIC-GMAC Automotive Finance Company Limited (formerly known as GMAC-SAIC Automotive Finance Company Limited) (SAIC-GMAC) which conducts automotive finance and financial services operations in China.

GM Financial provides consumer lending, both loan and lease, across the credit spectrum. Additionally GM Financial offers commercial products to dealer customers that include new and used vehicle inventory financing, inventory insurance, working capital, capital improvement loans, fleet financing and storage center financing.

In North America GM Financial's consumer automobile finance programs include sub-prime lending, full credit spectrum leasing and, more recently, prime lending. The sub-prime lending program is primarily offered to consumers with FICO scores of less than 620 who have limited access to automobile financing through banks and credit unions, and is expected to sustain a higher level of credit losses than prime lending. GM Financial is currently seeking to expand its prime lending programs through our franchised dealers and anticipates that prime lending will become an increasing percentage of originations and the consumer portfolio balance over time. The leasing product is offered through our franchised dealers and primarily targets prime consumers leasing new vehicles.

Internationally GM Financial抯 consumer automobile finance programs focus on financing prime quality consumers, leasing in several countries and finance-related insurance products through third parties, such as credit life, gap and extended warranty coverage.

GM Financial seeks to fund its operations in each country through local sources of funding to minimize currency and country risk. GM Financial primarily finances its loan, lease and commercial origination volume through the use of secured and unsecured credit facilities, through securitization transactions where such markets are developed and through the issuance of unsecured debt.

GM Financial retains an interest in the securitization transactions in the form of restricted cash accounts and overcollateralization, whereby more receivables are transferred to the securitization trusts than the amount of asset-backed securities issued by the securitization trusts, as well as the estimated future excess cash flows expected to be received by GM Financial over the life of the securitization. Excess cash flows result from the difference between the finance charges received from the obligors on the receivables and the interest paid to investors in the asset-backed securities net of credit losses and expenses. Excess cash flows in the securitization trusts are initially retained to fund credit enhancement requirements in order to attain specific credit ratings for the asset-backed securities issued by the securitization trusts. Once targeted credit enhancement requirements are reached and maintained excess cash flows are distributed to GM Financial.

Employees

At December 31, 2014 we employed 216,000 employees of whom 136,000 (63%) were hourly employees and 80,000 (37%) were salaried employees. At December 31, 2014, 51,000 (56%) of our U.S. employees were represented by unions, a majority of which were represented by the International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace and Agriculture Implement Workers of America (UAW). The following table summarizes worldwide employment (in thousands):

10


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

 
December 31, 2014
 
December 31, 2013
 
December 31, 2012
GMNA(a)
110

 
109

 
101

GME
37

 
37

 
40

GMIO
33

 
36

 
36

GMSA
29

 
31

 
32

GM Financial(b)
7

 
6

 
4

Total Worldwide
216

 
219

 
213

 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. - Salaried
40

 
36

 
30

U.S. - Hourly
51

 
51

 
50

_________
(a)
Increase in GMNA employees in the year ended December 31, 2013 includes an increase of approximately 4,000 employees due to insourcing of certain information technology support functions that were previously provided by outside parties and an increase of approximately 3,000 employees due to increase in launches and ramp up in manufacturing volume.
(b)
Increase in GM Financial employees in the year ended December 31, 2013 is due to the acquisition of the Ally Financial international operations.

Executive Officers of the Registrant
As of February 4, 2015 the names and ages of our executive officers and their positions and offices with GM are as follows:

11


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Name (Age)
 
Present GM Position (Effective Date)
 
Positions Held During the Past Five Years if Other than Present GM Position (Effective Date)
Mary T. Barra (53)
 
Chief Executive Officer and Member of the Board of Directors (2014)
 
Executive Vice President, Global Product Development, Purchasing & Supply Chain (2013)
Senior Vice President, Global Product Development (2011)
Vice President, Global Human Resources (2009)
Daniel Ammann (42)
 
President (2014)
 
Executive Vice President & Chief Financial Officer (2013)
Senior Vice President & Chief Financial Officer (2011)
GM Vice President, Finance & Treasurer (2010)
Morgan Stanley - Managing Director and Head of Industrial Investment Banking (2004)
Jaime Ardila (59)
 
Executive Vice President & President, South America (2013)
 
Vice President & President, South America (2010)
President and Managing Director of GM Mercosur (2007)
Alan S. Batey (51)
 
Executive Vice President & President, GM North America (2014)
 
Senior Vice President, Global Chevrolet and Brand Chief and U. S. Sales and Marketing (2013)
GM Vice President, U.S. Sales and Service, and Interim GM Chief Marketing Officer (2012)
Vice President, U.S. Chevrolet Sales and Service (2010)
Chairman & Managing Director, Holden, Ltd. (2009)
James B. DeLuca (53)
 
Executive Vice President, Global Manufacturing (2014)
 
Vice President, Manufacturing, GM International Operations (2013)
Vice President, Quality, GM International Operations (2009)
Stefan Jacoby (56)
 
Executive Vice President, GM Consolidated International Operations (2013)
 
Volvo Car Corporation - Global Chief Executive Officer and President (2010)
Volkswagen Group of America - Chief Executive Officer and President (2007)
Michael P. Millikin (66)(a)
 
Executive Vice President & General Counsel (2013)
 
Senior Vice President & General Counsel (2011)
GM Vice President & General Counsel (2009)
Karl-Thomas Neumann (53)
 
Executive Vice President & President, GM Europe & Chairman of the Management Board of Opel Group GmbH (2013)
 
CEO, Opel Group GmbH & President, GM Europe (2013)
Volkswagen Group China - Chief Executive Officer and President (2010)
Volkswagen Group - Executive Vice President, Electromobility (2009)
Mark L. Reuss (51)
 
Executive Vice President, Global Product Development, Purchasing & Supply Chain (2014)
 
Executive Vice President & President, North America (2013)
GM Vice President & President, North America (2009)
GM Vice President, Global Vehicle Engineering (2009)
Charles K. Stevens, III (55)
 
Executive Vice President & Chief Financial Officer (2014)
 
Chief Financial Officer, GM North America (2010)
Interim Chief Financial Officer, GM South America (2011)
Executive Director, Finance, GM de Mexico (2008)
Matthew Tsien (54)
 
Executive Vice President & President, GM China, Inc. (2014)
 
GM Consolidated International Operations Vice President, Planning, Program Management, & Strategic Alliances China (2012)
Executive Vice President, SAIC GM Wuling (2009)
Thomas S. Timko (46)
 
GM Vice President, Controller & Chief Accounting Officer (2013)
 
Applied Materials Inc. - Corporate Vice President, Chief Accounting Officer, and Corporate Controller (2010)
Delphi Automotive Corporation - Chief Accounting Officer and Controller (2006)
__________
(a)
Retiring effective July 2015 and available for consulting services to the Company through 2015.

There are no family relationships between any of the officers named above and there is no arrangement or understanding between any of the officers named above and any other person pursuant to which he or she was selected as an officer. Each of the officers named above was elected by the Board of Directors or a committee of the Board of Directors to hold office until the next annual election of officers and until his or her successor is elected and qualified or until his or her earlier resignation or removal. The Board of Directors elects the officers immediately following each annual meeting of the stockholders and may appoint other officers between annual meetings.

Segment Reporting Data


12


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Operating segment data and principal geographic area data for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 are summarized in Note 25 to our consolidated financial statements.

Website Access to Our Reports

Our internet website address is www.gm.com. In addition to the information about us and our subsidiaries contained in this 2014 Form 10-K information about us can be found on our website including information on our corporate governance principles. Our website and information included in or linked to our website are not part of this 2014 Form 10-K.

Our annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act) are available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after they are electronically filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The public may read and copy the materials we file with the SEC at the SEC's Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. Additionally the SEC maintains an internet site that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information. The address of the SEC's website is www.sec.gov.

*  *  *  *  *  *  *

Item 1A. Risk Factors

We face a number of significant risks and uncertainties in connection with our operations. Our business, results of operations and financial condition could be materially adversely affected by the factors described below. While we describe each risk separately, some of these risks are interrelated and certain risks could trigger the applicability of other risks described below.

Our business is highly dependent on the global automobile market sales volume, which can be volatile.

Our business and financial results are highly sensitive to sales volume. A number of economic and market conditions drive changes in vehicle sales, including real estate values, levels of unemployment, the availability of credit, fluctuations in the cost of fuel, consumer confidence and global economic conditions. We cannot predict future economic and market conditions with certainty.

Our ability to maintain profitability over the long-term is dependent upon our ability to introduce new and improved vehicle models that are able to attract a sufficient number of consumers.

The automotive industry, particularly in the U.S., is very competitive with market participants routinely introducing new and improved vehicle models designed to meet consumer expectations, and in the past our competitors have been very successful in persuading customers that previously purchased our products to purchase their vehicles instead. Producing new and improved vehicle models on a basis competitive with the models introduced by our competitors and preserving our reputation for designing, building and selling safe and high quality cars that meet customer preferences is critical to our long-term profitability. We will launch a substantial number of new vehicles in 2015. A successful launch of our new vehicles is critical to our short-term profitability.

The pace of our development and introduction of new and improved vehicles depends on our ability to implement successfully improved technological innovations in design, engineering and manufacturing, which requires extensive capital investment and the ability to retain and recruit new talent. In some cases the technologies that we plan to employ, such as hydrogen fuel cells and advanced battery technology, are not yet commercially practical and depend on significant future technological advances by us and by our suppliers. There can be no assurance that our competitors and others pursuing similar technologies and other competing technologies will not acquire similar or superior technologies sooner than we do or on an exclusive basis or at a significant price advantage.

Our profitability is dependent upon the success of our higher margin vehicles and luxury brands.

While we offer a balanced and complete portfolio of small, mid-size and large cars, cross-overs, sport utility vehicles (SUVs) and trucks, we generally recognize higher profit margins on our full-size pick-up trucks and SUVs. Our success is dependent upon consumer preferences and our ability to market our higher margin vehicles.


13


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Our future competitiveness and ability to achieve long-term profitability depends on our ability to control our costs, which requires us to successfully implement restructuring initiatives throughout our automotive operations.

We are continuing to implement a number of cost reduction and productivity improvement initiatives in our automotive operations, including labor modifications and substantial restructuring initiatives. Our future competitiveness depends upon our continued success in implementing these initiatives throughout our automotive operations. While some of the elements of cost reduction are within our control, others, such as interest rates or return on investments, which influence our expense for pensions, depend more on external factors, and there can be no assurance that such external factors will not materially adversely affect our ability to reduce our costs. Reducing costs may prove difficult due to our focus on increasing advertising and our belief that engineering expenses necessary to improve the performance, safety and customer satisfaction of our vehicles are likely to increase.

Any disruption in our suppliers' operations could disrupt our production schedule.

Our automotive operations are dependent upon the continued ability of our suppliers to deliver the systems, components, raw materials and parts that we need to manufacture our products. Our use of 搄ust-in-time?manufacturing processes allows us to maintain minimal inventory quantities of systems, components, raw materials and parts. As a result our ability to maintain production is dependent upon our suppliers delivering sufficient quantities of systems, components, raw materials and parts on time to meet our production schedules. In some instances we purchase systems, components, raw materials and parts from a single source and may be at an increased risk for supply disruptions. Where we experience supply disruptions, we may not be able to develop alternate sourcing quickly. Any disruption of our production schedule caused by an unexpected shortage of systems, components, raw materials or parts even for a relatively short period of time could cause us to alter production schedules or suspend production entirely.

An increase in cost of raw materials could materially harm our business.

We use various raw materials in our business including steel, aluminum, copper, platinum and palladium. The prices for these raw materials fluctuate depending on market conditions. In recent years freight charges and raw material costs increased. Substantial increases in the prices for our raw materials could reduce our profitability if we cannot recoup the increased costs through increased vehicle prices. Some of these raw materials, such as corrosion-resistant steel, are only available from a limited number of suppliers. We cannot guarantee that we will be able to maintain favorable arrangements and relationships with these suppliers. An increase in the cost or a sustained interruption in the supply or shortage of some of these raw materials, which may be caused by a deterioration of our relationships with suppliers or by events such as labor strikes, could negatively affect our net revenues and profitability to a material extent.

We operate in a highly competitive industry that has excess manufacturing capacity and attempts by our competitors to sell more vehicles could have a significant negative effect on our vehicle pricing, market share and operating results.

The global automotive industry is highly competitive and overall manufacturing capacity in the industry exceeds demand. Many manufacturers have relatively high fixed labor costs as well as significant limitations on their ability to close facilities and reduce fixed costs. Our competitors may respond to these relatively high fixed costs by attempting to sell more vehicles by adding vehicle enhancements, providing subsidized financing or leasing programs, offering marketing incentives or reducing vehicle prices. Manufacturers in lower cost countries such as China and India have emerged as competitors in key emerging markets and announced their intention of exporting their products to established markets as a bargain alternative to entry-level automobiles. These actions have had, and are expected to continue to have, a significant negative effect on our vehicle pricing, market share and operating results, and present a significant risk to our ability to enhance our revenue per vehicle.

Our competitors may be able to benefit from the cost savings offered by industry consolidation or alliances.

Designing, manufacturing and selling vehicles is capital intensive and requires substantial investments in manufacturing, machinery, research and development, product design, engineering, technology and marketing in order to meet both consumer preferences and regulatory requirements. Large original equipment manufacturers are able to benefit from economies of scale by leveraging their investments and activities on a global basis across brands and nameplates. If our competitors consolidate or enter into other strategic agreements such as alliances, they may be able to take better advantage of these economies of scale to enhance their competitiveness or liquidity position.

Our business plan contemplates that we restructure our operations in various European countries, but we may not succeed in doing so.

14


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


We face difficult market and operating conditions in certain parts of the world that may require us to restructure, impair or rationalize these operations. In many countries across our regions we have experienced challenges in our operations and continue to strategically assess the manner in which we operate in certain countries. As we continue to assess our performance throughout the regions, additional restructuring, impairment and rationalization actions may be required and may be material. The key areas of our plan include: (1) investments in our product portfolio; (2) a revised brand strategy; and (3) reducing material, development and production costs. The success of our plan will depend on a combination of our ability to execute the actions contemplated, as well as external economic factors, which are outside of our control.

We could be materially adversely affected by a negative outcome in unusual or significant litigation, governmental investigations or other legal proceedings related to the Ignition Switch Recall.

We are subject to legal proceedings involving various issues, including product liability lawsuits, stockholder litigation and governmental investigations, including class actions related to the Ignition Switch Recall, such as a lawsuit for the alleged diminished value of vehicles affected by the Ignition Switch Recall. Refer to the "GM North America" section of Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations (MD&A) for additional information on the Ignition Switch Recall. At this point we are unable to predict the duration, scope, developments in, results of or consequences of the government's investigations. Such lawsuits and investigations could in the future result in the imposition of damages, substantial fines, civil lawsuits and criminal penalties, interruptions of business, modification of business practices, equitable remedies and other sanctions against us or our personnel as well as significant legal and other costs. Because the matters are ongoing there can be no assurance as to how the resulting consequences, if any, may impact our business, reputation, consolidated financial condition, results of operations or cash flow. We cannot currently estimate the potential liability, damages or range of potential loss as a result of the legal proceedings and governmental investigations. For a further discussion of these matters refer to Note 17 to our consolidated financial statements.

The costs and effect on our reputation of product recalls could materially adversely affect our business.

From time to time we recall our products to address performance, compliance or safety-related issues. The costs we incur in connection with these recalls typically include the cost of the part being replaced and labor to remove and replace the defective part. In addition product recalls can harm our reputation and cause us to lose customers, particularly if those recalls cause consumers to question the safety or reliability of our products. Conversely not issuing a recall or not issuing a recall on a timely basis can harm our reputation and cause us to lose customers for the same reasons as expressed above.

We are subject to extensive governmental laws, regulations and policies including safety, fuel economy, and greenhouse gas emissions, the enforcement of which or changes to existing ones, may have a significant effect on how we do business.

We are affected significantly by governmental regulations that can increase costs related to the production of our vehicles and affect our product portfolio. We anticipate that the number and extent of these regulations, and the related costs and changes to our product lineup, will increase significantly in the future. These government regulatory requirements could significantly affect our plans for global product development and may result in substantial costs, including civil or criminal penalties. They may also result in limits on the types of vehicles we sell and where we sell them, which can affect revenue.

In the U.S. automotive safety standards are regulated by the NHTSA, whose regulators require that automotive manufacturers implement safety measures such as recalls for vehicles that do not or may not comply with relevant safety standards. Due to these regulations, we could be subject to civil or criminal penalties or may incur various costs including significant costs for free repairs, if we are required to, or voluntarily decide to, implement safety measures such as a recall. For example, we are currently facing U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, Congressional, SEC, Transport Canada and state investigations related to the Ignition Switch Recall.

In the U.S. vehicle fuel economy and greenhouse gas emissions are regulated under a harmonized national program administered by the NHTSA and the EPA.

We are committed to meeting or exceeding these U.S. regulatory requirements. We expect that to comply with these requirements we will be required to sell a significant volume of hybrid electric vehicles, as well as implement new technologies for conventional internal combustion engines, all at increased cost levels. There is no assurance that we will be able to produce and sell vehicles that use such technologies on a profitable basis or that our customers will purchase such vehicles in the quantities necessary for us to comply with these regulatory programs.

15


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


If we are not able to comply with specific new requirements then we could be subject to sizeable civil penalties or have to restrict product offerings drastically to remain in compliance. Environmental liabilities for which we may be responsible are not reasonably estimable and could be substantial. Violations of safety or emissions standards could result in the recall of one or more of our products, negotiated remedial actions, possible fines or a combination of any of those items. We must also cover the cost of repairs conducted under emission defect and performance warranties which apply for specified periods of time and mileage. In turn any of these actions could have substantial adverse effects on our operations including facility idling, reduced employment, increased costs and loss of revenue.

Our defined benefit pension plans are currently underfunded and our pension funding requirements could increase significantly due to a reduction in funded status as a result of a variety of factors, including weak performance of financial markets, declining interest rates, changes in assumptions and investments that do not achieve adequate returns.

Our employee benefit plans currently hold a significant amount of equity and fixed income securities. A detailed description of the investment funds and strategies is disclosed in the "Critical Accounting Estimates" section of the MD&A and Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements, which also describes significant concentrations of risk to the plan investments.

There are additional risks due to the complexity and magnitude of our investments. Examples include implementation of significant changes in investment policy, insufficient market liquidity in particular asset classes and the inability to quickly rebalance illiquid and long-term investments.

Our future funding requirements for our U.S. defined benefit pension plans qualified with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) depend upon the future performance of assets placed in trusts for these plans, the level of interest rates used to determine funding levels, the level of benefits provided for by the plans and any changes in government laws and regulations. Future funding requirements generally increase if the discount rate decreases or if actual asset returns are lower than expected asset returns, as other factors are held constant. Our potential funding requirements are described in Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements.

Factors which affect future funding requirements for our U.S. defined benefit plans generally affect the required funding for non-U.S. plans. Certain plans outside the U.S. do not have assets and therefore the obligation is funded as benefits are paid. If local legal authorities increase the minimum funding requirements for our non-U.S. plans, we could be required to contribute more funds.

Shortages of and volatility in the price of oil may cause shifts in consumer vehicle demand.

Volatile oil prices in recent years have tended to cause a shift in consumer demand towards smaller, more fuel-efficient vehicles, which provide lower profit margins. Any increases in the price of oil or any sustained shortage of oil, including as a result of political instability in the Middle East, South America and African nations, could weaken the demand for our higher margin full-size pick-up trucks and SUVs, which could decrease. Lower oil prices in oil producing countries could also impact our ability to sell vehicles in those countries.

We rely on GM Financial to provide financial services to our dealers and customers in a majority of the markets in which we sell vehicles. GM Financial faces a number of business, economic and financial risks that could impair its access to capital and negatively affect its business and operations and its ability to provide leasing and financing to consumers and commercial lending to our dealers to support additional sales of our vehicles.

We rely on GM Financial in North America, Europe, South America and China to support leasing and sales of our vehicles to consumers requiring vehicle financing and also to provide commercial lending to our dealers. Any reduction of GM Financial's ability to provide such financial services would negatively affect our efforts to support additional sales of our vehicles and expand our market penetration among consumers and dealers. The factors that could adversely affect GM Financial's business and operations and reduce its ability to provide financing services at competitive rates include:

?
The availability of borrowings under its credit facilities to fund its consumer and dealer finance activities;
?
Its ability to access a variety of financing sources including the asset-backed securities market and other secured and unsecured debt markets;
?
The performance of loans and leases in its portfolio, which could be materially affected by delinquencies, defaults or prepayments;

16


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

?
Wholesale auction values of used vehicles;
?
Higher than expected vehicle return rates and the residual value performance on vehicles GM Financial leases;
?
Fluctuations in interest rates and currencies; and
?
Changes to regulation, supervision and licensing across various jurisdictions.

Our planned investment in new technology in the future is significant and may not be funded at anticipated levels and, even if funded at anticipated levels, may not result in successful vehicle applications.

We intend to invest significant capital resources to support our products and to develop new technology. In addition we plan to invest heavily in alternative fuel and advanced propulsion technologies in 2015, largely to support our planned expansion of hybrid and electric vehicles. However if our future operations do not provide us with the cash flow we anticipate, we may be forced to reduce, delay or cancel our planned investments in new technology.

In some cases the technologies that we plan to employ are not yet commercially practical and depend on significant future technological advances by us and by suppliers. There can be no assurance that advances in technology will occur in a timely or feasible way, that the funds that we have budgeted for these purposes will be adequate or that we will be able to establish our right to these technologies.

Security breaches and other disruptions to our information technology networks and systems could interfere with our operations and could compromise the confidentiality of our proprietary information.

We rely upon information technology networks and systems, including in-vehicle systems and mobile devices, some of which are managed by third-parties, to process, transmit and store electronic information, and to manage or support a variety of business processes and activities, including supply chain management, manufacturing, invoicing and collection of payments from our dealer network and from customers of GM Financial. Additionally we collect and store sensitive data, including intellectual property, proprietary business information, propriety business information of our dealers and suppliers, as well as personally identifiable information of our customers and employees, in data centers and on information technology networks. The secure operation of these information technology networks, and the processing and maintenance of this information, is critical to our business operations and strategy. Despite security measures and business continuity plans, our information technology networks and systems may be vulnerable to damage, disruptions or shutdowns due to attacks by hackers or breaches due to errors or malfeasance by employees, contractors and others who have access to our networks and systems or computer viruses. The occurrence of any of these events could compromise our networks and the information stored there could be accessed, publicly disclosed, lost or stolen. We have been the target of these types of attacks in the past with no material known impacts and future attacks are likely to occur. If successful, these types of attacks on our network or systems, including in-vehicle systems and mobile devices, or service failures could have a material adverse effect on our business and results of operations, due to, among other things, the loss of proprietary data, interruptions or delays in our business operations and damage to our reputation. In addition any such access, disclosure or other loss of information could result in legal claims or proceedings, liability or regulatory penalties under laws protecting the privacy of personal information, disrupt operations and reduce the competitive advantage we hope to derive from our investment in advanced technologies. Our insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover all the costs related to significant security attacks or disruptions resulting from such attacks.

A significant amount of our operations are conducted by joint ventures that we cannot operate solely for our benefit.

Many of our operations, primarily in China, are carried out by joint ventures such as Shanghai General Motors Co., Ltd. In joint ventures we share ownership and management of a company with one or more parties who may not have the same goals, strategies, priorities or resources as we do and may compete with us outside the joint venture. Joint ventures are intended to be operated for the equal benefit of all co-owners, rather than for our exclusive benefit. Operating a business as a joint venture often requires additional organizational formalities as well as time-consuming procedures for sharing information and making decisions. In joint ventures we are required to foster our relationships with our co-owners as well as promote the overall success of the joint venture, and if a co-owner changes or relationships deteriorate, our success in the joint venture may be materially adversely affected. The benefits from a successful joint venture are shared among the co-owners, so that we do not receive all the benefits from our successful joint ventures.


17


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Our business in China is subject to aggressive competition and is sensitive to economic and market conditions.

Maintaining a strong position in the Chinese market is a key component of our global growth strategy. The automotive market in China is highly competitive, with competition from many of the largest global manufacturers and numerous smaller domestic manufacturers. As the size of the Chinese market continues to increase we anticipate that additional competitors, both international and domestic, will seek to enter the Chinese market and that existing market participants will act aggressively to increase their market share. Increased competition may result in price reductions, reduced margins and our inability to gain or hold market share. In addition our business in China is sensitive to economic and market conditions that drive sales volume in China.

We could be materially adversely affected by changes or imbalances in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates.

Given the nature of the automotive industry and global spread of our business, we have significant exposures to risks related to changes in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates. In preparing the consolidated financial statements we translate our revenues and expenses outside the U.S. into U.S. Dollars using the average foreign currency exchange rate for the period and the assets and liabilities using the foreign currency exchange rate at the balance sheet date.

Our businesses outside the U.S. expose us to additional risks.

The majority of our vehicles are sold outside the U.S. We are pursuing growth opportunities for our business in a variety of business environments outside the U.S. Operating in a large number of different regions and countries exposes us to political, economic and other risks as well as multiple foreign regulatory requirements that are subject to change, including:

?
Economic downturns in foreign countries or geographic regions where we have significant operations, such as China;
?
Economic tensions between governments and changes in international trade and investment policies, including imposing restrictions on the repatriation of dividends, especially between the U.S. and China;
?
Changes in foreign regulations impacting our overall business model restricting our ability to buy and sell our products in those countries, especially China;
?
Differing local product preferences and product requirements, including fuel economy, vehicle emissions and safety;
?
Impact of compliance with U.S. and other foreign countries?export controls and economic sanctions;
?
Liabilities resulting from U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, including those related to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and certain other anti-corruption laws;
?
Differing labor regulations and union relationships;
?
Consequences from changes in tax laws;
?
Difficulties in obtaining financing in foreign countries for local operations; and
?
Political and economic instability, natural calamities, war and terrorism.


Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments

NoneITEM  1.

BUSINESS

Overview

We design, develop, manufacture and sell high-performance fully electric vehicles, advanced electric vehicle powertrain components and stationary energy storage systems. We have established our own network of sales and service centers and Supercharger stations globally to accelerate the widespread adoption of electric vehicles.  We believe our vehicles, electric vehicle engineering expertise, and business model differentiates us from incumbent automobile manufacturers.

We are currently producing and selling our second vehicle, the Model S sedan.  Model S is a four door, five-passenger premium sedan that offers exceptional performance, functionality and attractive styling. Model S inherited many of the electric powertrain innovations we introduced with our first vehicle, the Tesla Roadster.  We commenced deliveries of Model S in June 2012 and as of December 31, 2014 we have delivered almost 57,000 Model S vehicles worldwide. Since its launch, Model S has won several awards, including the prestigious Motor Trend Car of the Year for 2013. Surveys by Consumer Reports gave Model S the highest customer satisfaction score of any car in the world in 2013 and gave Tesla Service the best overall satisfaction rating in the entire automotive industry in 2015. Model S also earned the highest safety rating in the United States by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.  We have continued to improve Model S by introducing performance, all-wheel drive dual motor, autopilot options, and free over-the-air software updates.  

We anticipate commencing customer shipments of our third vehicle, the Model X crossover, in the third quarter of 2015.  This unique vehicle has been designed to fill the niche between the roominess of a minivan and the style of an SUV, while having high performance features such as our all-wheel drive dual motor system and fast 0 to 60 miles per hour acceleration. After the Model X, our goal is to introduce the Model 3, a lower priced sedan designed for the mass market, in 2017.

The commercial production of fully electric vehicles that meets consumers?range and performance expectations requires substantial design, engineering, and integration work on almost every system of our vehicles.  Our design and vehicle engineering capabilities, combined with the technical advancements of our powertrain system, have enabled us to design and develop electric vehicles that we believe overcome the design, styling, and performance issues that have historically limited broad consumer adoption of electric vehicles. As a result, we believe our customers enjoy several benefits, including:

?

Long Range and Recharging Flexibility. Our vehicles offer ranges that are over double the range of any other commercially available electric vehicle. In addition, our vehicles incorporate our proprietary on-board charging system, permitting recharging from almost any available electrical outlet. Model S also offers fast charging capability from our Supercharger network. We believe the long-range and charging flexibility of our vehicles will help reduce consumer anxiety over range, alleviate the need for expensive, large-scale charging infrastructure, and differentiate our vehicles as compared to those of our competitors.

?

Energy Efficiency and Cost of Ownership. We believe our vehicles offer consumers an attractive cost of ownership when compared to similar internal combustion engine or hybrid electric vehicles. Using only an electric powertrain enables us to create a lighter, more energy efficient vehicle that is mechanically simpler than currently available hybrid or internal combustion engine vehicles. We currently estimate that the cost to fuel our vehicles is approximately one-fourth that of comparable internal combustion vehicles in the United States, and even less internationally where gasoline prices are typically higher. We also expect our electric vehicles will have lower relative maintenance costs than hybrid, plug-in hybrid, or internal combustion engine vehicles due to fewer moving parts and the absence of certain components, including oil, oil filters, spark plugs and engine valves. Additionally, government incentives that are currently available can reduce the cost of ownership even further.

?

High-Performance Without Compromised Design or Functionality. We believe our vehicles deliver unparalleled driving experiences with instantaneous and sustained acceleration through an extended range of speed. In addition, our Model S seats five adults, provides best in class storage in the trunk and hood while offering design and performance comparable to, or better than, other premium sedans.

We sell our vehicles through our own sales and service network which we are continuing to grow globally. We believe the benefits we receive from distribution ownership will enable us to improve the speed of product development and improve the capital efficiency of our business. We are also continuing to build our network of Superchargers in the United States, Europe and Asia to provide properly equipped Model S vehicle owners as well as future Tesla vehicle owners with fast and free charging to enable convenient long distance travel.  

In addition to developing our own vehicles, we have developed and currently sell and service full electric powertrain systems and components to other automobile manufacturers.  We also produce and sell stationary energy storage products for use in homes, commercial sites, and utilities. The applications for these battery systems include backup power, peak demand reduction, demand response, and wholesale electric market services.

4

 

We manufacture our products primarily at our facilities in Fremont, California, Lathrop, California and Tilburg, Netherlands. We are developing the Tesla Gigafactory, a facility where we intend to work together with our suppliers to integrate battery precursor material, cell, module and battery pack production at a site near Reno, Nevada.  We plan to use the battery packs manufactured at the Gigafactory for our vehicles, starting initially for Model S and Model X in 2016, and later for our Model 3 vehicle, as well as for stationary storage applications.

Our Vehicles and Products

We currently design, develop, manufacture and sell fully electric vehicles and electric powertrain components. We are currently selling primarily the Model S.

Model S

Model S is a fully electric, four-door, five-adult passenger sedan that offers compelling range and performance with zero tailpipe emissions. We began customer deliveries in June 2012. As of December 31, 2014, we had delivered almost 57,000 Model S vehicles.

Model S offers a range on a single charge of up to 265 miles as determined using the United States EPA抯 combined two-cycle city/highway test. To complement this range, we also offer the capability to fast charge Model S at our Supercharger facilities. In addition, we designed Model S to incorporate a modular battery pack in the floor of the vehicle, enabling it to be rapidly swapped out at certain of our service centers and specialized commercial battery exchange facilities that we anticipate may be available in the future.

The 60 kWh and 85 kWh battery pack versions of Model S have an effective base price of $62,400, and $72,400, respectively, in the United States, assuming and after giving effect to the continuation of a United States federal tax credit of $7,500 for the purchase of alternative fuel vehicles. We offer performance and all-wheel drive dual motor system options with our 85 kWh Model S. The performance version of our All-Wheel Drive Dual Motor Model S accelerates from 0 to 60 miles per hour in 3.2 seconds, making it the quickest sedan in the world according to Motor Trend magazine.

We believe Model S offers a unique combination of functionality, convenience, safety and styling without compromising performance and energy efficiency. With the battery pack in the floor of the vehicle and the motor and gearbox in line with the rear axle, our single motor Model S provides best in class storage space of 31.6 cubic feet, including storage under both the tailgate and the hood. By way of comparison, this storage space exceeds the approximately 14 cubic feet of storage available in the 2015 BMW 5 Series sedan and the approximately 18 cubic feet of storage available in the 2015 Cadillac XTS. In addition, we have designed Model S to include a third row with two rear-facing child seats, allowing us to offer seating for five adults and two children. Model S is also available with premium luxury features, including a 17 inch touch screen driver interface and our advanced autopilot system.  Our autopilot system, which is being progressively enabled over time through over-the-air software updates, includes both safety features such as collision warning systems and automatic braking and convenience features such as traffic aware cruise control.  Model S also offers advanced wireless connectivity, such as 3G connectivity, and driver customization of the infotainment and climate control systems of the vehicle. We believe the combination of performance, safety, styling, convenience and energy efficiency of Model S positions it as a compelling alternative to other vehicles in the luxury and performance segments.

We have designed Model S to provide a lower cost of ownership as compared to other vehicles in its class. We consider the purchase price, cost of fuel and the cost of maintenance over a six year ownership period in this calculation. We assume comparable residual values, warranties, insurance costs and promotions and assume that currently available consumer incentives are still available at the time of a Model S purchase. In addition to the competitive pricing of Model S relative to other premium vehicles, we estimate that customers of electric vehicles will enjoy lower fuel costs. For example, assuming an average of 15,000 miles driven per year, an average electricity cost of 12.1 cents per kilowatt-hour and an average gasoline price of $2.83 per gallon over the full ownership of the vehicle which were the average electricity cost and premium gasoline price in the United States, respectively, for December 2014, and based on our estimate of the energy efficiency of Model S, we estimate that our Model S could save approximately $1,600 per year less in fuel costs than a comparable premium internal combustion engine sedan. In international markets, where gasoline prices can be 2-3 times those of the United States, the savings are greater.

We have designed Model S with an adaptable platform architecture and common electric powertrain that we intend to leverage to create future electric vehicle models, including our Model X. In particular, by designing our electric powertrain within the chassis to accommodate different vehicle body styles, we believe that we can save significant time in future vehicle development. In addition, we believe our strategy of using currently available battery cells will enable us to leverage improvements in cell chemistries and rapidly introduce planned vehicles with different range options.

5

 

Model X

Our Model X crossover is the first vehicle we intend to develop by leveraging the Model S platform. This unique vehicle has been designed to offer the space and functionality of a sport utility vehicle while having high performance features such as our fully electric, all-wheel drive dual motor system. Model X will seat seven adults and incorporate a unique falcon wing door system for superior access to the second and third seating rows. We anticipate that the pricing of Model X will be similar to a comparably equipped Model S.  We currently intend to begin customer deliveries of Model X in the third quarter of 2015. After its initial launch in the United States, Model X will be sold in all the markets where Model S is available including in Asia and Europe.

Model 3

We have also publicly announced our intent to develop a third generation electric vehicle, called Model 3, to be produced at the Tesla Factory. We intend to offer this vehicle at a lower price point and expect to produce it at higher volumes than our Model S. We expect that this vehicle will be introduced in 2017.

The Tesla Roadster

Our first vehicle, the Tesla Roadster, is the first high-performance electric sports car. It can accelerate from zero to 60 miles per hour in as little as 3.7 seconds and has a maximum speed of approximately 120 miles per hour. The Tesla Roadster also has a range of 245 miles on a single charge, as determined using the United States EPA抯 combined two-cycle city/highway test. We have sold approximately 2,500 Tesla Roadsters to customers in over 30 countries, predominately in North America and Europe. We concluded the production run of the Tesla Roadster in January 2012.

Stationary Energy Storage Applications

Using the energy management technologies and manufacturing processes developed for our vehicle powertrain systems, we have developed stationary energy storage products for use in homes, commercial sites and utilities. The applications for these battery systems include backup power, peak demand reduction, demand response and wholesale electric market services. We began selling our home systems in 2013 and our commercial and utility systems in 2014. We plan to ramp sales of these products in 2015.

Powertrain Development and Sales

In addition to our own vehicles, we also design, develop, manufacture and sell advanced electric vehicle powertrain components to other automotive manufacturers.  We have provided development services and full powertrain systems and components to Daimler for its Smart fortwo, A-Class, and B-Class electric vehicles and to Toyota for use in its RAV4 EV. We are continuing to supply production parts for the Daimler B class electric vehicle.

Technology

We believe the core competencies of our company are powertrain engineering, vehicle engineering and innovative manufacturing. Our core intellectual property is contained within our electric powertrain and the ability to design a vehicle which capitalizes on the uniqueness of an electric powertrain. Our electric powertrain consists of the following: battery pack, power electronics, motor, gearbox and the control software which enables the components to operate as a system. We designed each of these major elements for our Tesla Roadster and Model S and plan to use much of this technology in Model X, Model 3, our future electric vehicles and powertrain components that we build for other manufacturers. Our powertrain and battery pack have a modular design, enabling future generations of electric vehicles and our stationary storage applications to incorporate a significant amount of this technology. Further, our powertrain is very compact and contains far fewer moving parts than the internal combustion powertrain. These features enable us to adapt it for a variety of applications, including our future vehicles and any powertrain components we build for other manufacturers.

Battery Pack

We design our battery packs to achieve high energy density at a low cost while also maintaining safety, reliability and long life.  For example, we have designed our Model S battery packs to store 85 kilowatt hours of useful energy and offer a warranty of unlimited miles over eight years. Our proprietary technology includes cooling systems, safety systems, charge balancing systems, battery engineering for vibration and environmental durability, robotic manufacturing processes, customized motor design and the software and electronics management systems necessary to manage battery and vehicle performance under demanding real-life driving conditions. We have significant experience and expertise in the safety and management systems needed to work with lithium-ion cells in the demanding automotive environment. We believe these advancements have enabled us to produce a battery pack at a low cost per kilowatt-hour.

6

 

We have designed our battery pack system to permit flexibility with respect to battery cell chemistry, form factor and vendor. In so doing, we believe that we can leverage the substantial battery cell investments and advancements being made globally by battery cell manufacturers and ourselves to continue to improve the cost per kilowatt-hour of our battery pack. We maintain an internal battery cell testing lab and an extensive performance database of the many available lithium-ion cell vendors and chemistry types. We intend to incorporate the battery cells that provide the best value and performance possible into our battery packs, and we expect this to continue over time as battery cells continue to improve in energy storage capacity, longevity, power delivery and cost. We believe this flexibility will enable us to continue to evaluate new battery cells as they become commercially viable, and thereby optimize battery pack system performance and cost for our current and future vehicles. In addition, we are designing the cell manufacturing equipment for the Tesla Gigafactory to enable flexibility in terms of battery chemistry and form factor.  We believe our ability to change battery cell chemistries and vendors while retaining our existing investments in software, electronics, manufacturing equipment, testing and vehicle packaging, will enable us to quickly deploy various battery cells into our products and leverage the latest advancements in battery cell technology.

The range of our electric vehicles on a single charge declines principally as a function of usage, time and charging patterns. Customers?use of their Tesla vehicle as well as the frequency with which they charge the battery of their Tesla vehicle can result in additional deterioration of the battery抯 ability to hold a charge. For example, we currently expect that the Tesla Roadster battery pack will retain approximately 70% of its ability to hold its initial charge after approximately 100,000 miles or seven years, which will result in a decrease to the vehicle抯 initial range. In comparison with the Roadster battery pack, preliminary internal testing and customer results of Model S to date suggest that the retention rate of the Model S battery pack is greater, due to improvements at the battery cell and pack level. In addition, based on internal testing, we estimate that the Model S would have an approximate 5-10% reduction in range when operated continuously in 0癈 temperatures.

To date, we have tested hundreds of battery cells of different chemistries, form factors and designs. Based on this evaluation, we are presently using lithium-ion battery cells based on the 18650 form factor in all of our battery packs. We intend to use the same battery cell form factor in Model X and entered into a supply agreement with Panasonic Corporation (Panasonic) for the use of Panasonic抯 battery cells in Model S and Model X. We expect these battery cells to exhibit better performance and longer lifetimes than the battery cells used in the Tesla Roadster.  

Power Electronics

The power electronics in our electric powertrain govern the flow of electrical current throughout the car, primarily the current that flows into and out of the battery pack. The power electronics have two primary functions, the control of torque generation in the motor while driving and the control of energy delivery back into the battery pack while charging.

The first function is accomplished through the drive inverter, which converts direct current (DC) from the battery pack into alternating current (AC) to drive our three-phase induction motors. The drive inverter also converts the AC generated by regenerative braking back into DC for electrical storage in the battery pack. The drive inverter performs this function by using a high-performance digital signal processor which runs some of the most complicated and detailed software in the vehicle. In so doing, the drive inverter is directly responsible for the performance, high efficiency and overall driving experience of the vehicle.

The second function, charging the battery pack, is accomplished by the charger, which converts alternating current (usually from a wall outlet or other electricity source) into direct current that can be accepted by the battery. Tesla vehicles can recharge on a variety of AC electrical sources, from a common outlet to a high power circuit of up to 22kW, which provides faster recharging. Vehicles in both the United States and Europe come with the Tesla Mobile Connector which enables charging from a variety of different outlets. In other markets, Tesla offers a Tesla Wall Connector that can be hardwired at a wide range of power levels to suit the electrical capabilities of the charging location.

The most common home charging system uses a standard high power and Mobile Connector to charge overnight.  On the road, customers can also charge using our Supercharger network or at a variety of destinations that have deployed our charging equipment.  In addition, Model S vehicles can also charge at a variety of public charging stations around the world, either natively or through a suite of adapters. This flexibility in charging provides customers with additional mobility, while also allowing them to conveniently charge the vehicle overnight at home.

7

 

Vehicle Control and Infotainment Software

The performance and safety systems of our vehicles and their battery packs require sophisticated control software. There are numerous processors in our vehicles to control these functions, and we write custom firmware for many of these processors. The flow of electricity between the battery pack and the motor must be tightly controlled in order to deliver the performance and behavior expected in the vehicle. For example, software algorithms enable the vehicle to mimic the 揷reep?feeling which drivers expect from an internal combustion engine vehicle without having to apply pressure on the accelerator. Similar algorithms control traction, vehicle stability and the sustained acceleration and regenerative braking of the vehicle. Software also is used extensively to monitor the charge state of each of the cells of the battery pack and to manage all of its safety systems. Drivers use the information and control systems in our vehicles to optimize performance, customize vehicle behavior, manage charging modes and times and control all infotainment functions. We develop almost all of this software, including most of the user interfaces, internally.  We are also developing expertise in vehicle autopilot systems, including road tracking, lane changing, automated parking, driver warning systems and automated braking functions.

Vehicle Design and Engineering

In addition to the design, development and production of the powertrain, we have created significant in-house capabilities in the design and engineering of electric vehicles and electric vehicle components and systems. We design and engineer bodies, chassis, interiors, heating and cooling and low voltage electrical systems in house and to a lesser extent in conjunction with our suppliers. Our team has core competencies in computer aided design and crash test simulations which we expect to reduce the product development time of new models.

Several traditional automotive subsystems required substantial redesign and custom optimization to integrate with the powertrain of an electric vehicle. For example, we redesigned the heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) system to integrate with the battery thermal management system and to operate without the energy generated from an internal combustion engine. We have developed expertise in integrating these components with the high-voltage power source in the vehicle and in designing components that significantly reduce their load on the vehicle battery pack, thereby maximizing the available range of the vehicle.

Additionally, our team has expertise in lightweight materials, a very important characteristic for electric vehicles given the impact of mass on range. Model S is built with a lightweight aluminum body and chassis which incorporates a variety of materials and production methods that help optimize the weight of the vehicle.

Sales and Marketing

Company-Owned Stores and Galleries

We market and sell cars directly to consumers through an international network of company-owned stores and galleries. Our Tesla stores and galleries are highly visible, premium outlets in major metropolitan markets, some of which combine retail sales and service. We have also found that opening a service center in a new geographic area can increase demand. As a result, we have complemented our store strategy with sales facilities and personnel in service centers to more rapidly expand our retail footprint. We refer to these as 揝ervice Plus?locations. Including all of our sales, Service Plus and service facilities, we operated 159 locations around the world as of December 31, 2014.

We believe that by owning our own sales and service network we can offer a compelling customer experience while achieving operating efficiencies and capturing sales and service revenues incumbent automobile manufacturers do not enjoy in the traditional franchised distribution and service model. Our customers deal directly with our own Tesla-employed sales and service staff, creating what we believe is a differentiated buying experience from the buying experience consumers have with franchised automobile dealers and service centers. We believe we will also be able to better control costs of inventory, manage warranty service and pricing, maintain and strengthen the Tesla brand, and obtain rapid customer feedback. Further, we believe that by owning our sales network we will avoid the conflict of interest in the traditional dealership structure inherent to most incumbent automobile manufacturers where the sale of warranty parts and repairs by a dealer are a key source of revenue and profit for the dealer but often are an expense for the vehicle manufacturer.

8

 

Tesla Supercharger Network

We are building a network of up to 120 kW fast charging equipment, each called a Tesla Supercharger, throughout North America, Europe and Asia for fast charging of Model S and future Tesla vehicles. Our Supercharger network is a strategic corporate initiative designed to remove a barrier to the broader adoption of electric vehicles caused by the perception of limited vehicle range and to provide free charging access to Tesla抯 existing customers.  The Tesla Supercharger is an industrial grade, high speed charger designed to replenish 170 miles of range in the battery pack in as little as 30 minutes. Supercharger stations typically have between four to ten Superchargers and are strategically placed primarily along well-travelled highways to allow Model S owners to enjoy long distance travel with convenient, minimal stops. We currently have 380 Supercharger stations open in North America, Europe, and Asia. Access to the Supercharger network is currently available free of charge to owners of Model S vehicles with the 85 kWh battery pack options and when purchased as an upfront option for 60 kWh. We are planning to methodically expand the Supercharger network over the next few years in the United States, Europe and Asia.

Destination Charging

We are working with a wide variety of locations, including hotels and popular destinations, to offer an additional charging option for our customers.  These destination charging partners deploy our wall connectors and provide charging free of charge to Model S owners.  Almost 1,000 locations in Asia and North America currently have 1,800 Tesla wall connectors installed.  We plan to expand the Destination Charging program into Europe in Q2 of this year.

Orders and Reservations

We typically carry a very limited inventory of our Model S vehicles at our Tesla stores. The vast majority of our customers customize their vehicle by placing an order with us. We require a $2,500 payment to begin production for these, which is collected once the customer has selected the vehicle specifications and has entered into a purchase agreement. In certain markets, we require additional payments a few weeks prior to delivery. We require all remaining payment of the purchase price of the vehicle upon delivery of the vehicle to the customer.

For Model X, which is currently not in production, we require an initial refundable reservation payment of at least $5,000. Reservation payments and deposits are used by us to fund, in part, our working capital requirements and help us to align production with demand.

Marketing

Our principal marketing goals are to:

?

generate demand for our vehicles and drive leads to our sales teams;

?

build long-term brand awareness and manage corporate reputation;

?

manage our existing customer base to create loyalty and customer referrals; and

?

enable customer input into the product development process.

Historically, we have been able to generate significant media coverage of our company and our vehicles, and we believe we will continue to do so. To date, media coverage and word of mouth have been the primary drivers of our sales leads and have helped us achieve sales without traditional advertising and at relatively low marketing costs.

Our marketing efforts include events where our vehicles are displayed and demonstrated. These events range from widely attended public events, such as the Detroit, Los Angeles, and Frankfurt auto shows, to smaller events oriented towards sales, such as private drive events.

Service and Warranty

Service

We provide service for our electric vehicles at our company-owned service centers, at our Service Plus locations or, in certain areas for an additional charge, through Tesla Ranger mobile technicians who provide services that do not require a vehicle lift. We own and operate 95 service locations as of December 31, 2014. We are continuing our plan to build a number of additional service centers in several markets worldwide.

Model S is designed with the capability to wirelessly upload the data to us via an on-board GSM system, allowing us to diagnose and remedy many problems before ever looking at the vehicle. When maintenance or service is required, a customer can schedule service by contacting one of our Tesla service centers. Our Tesla Rangers, or mobile service team, can also perform an array of services that do not require a vehicle lift from the convenience of a customer抯 home or other remote location.

9

 

We believe that our company-owned service centers enable our technicians to work closely with our engineers and research and development teams in Silicon Valley to identify problems, find solutions, and incorporate improvements faster than incumbent automobile manufacturers.

New Vehicle Limited Warranty, Maintenance and Extended Service Plans

For our Model S customers, we provide a four year or 50,000 mile New Vehicle Limited Warranty with every Model S, subject to separate limited warranties for the supplemental restraint system and battery. During the third quarter of 2014, we extended the warranty on our Model S drive unit to eight years from four. The New Vehicle Limited Warranty also covers the battery for a period of eight years or 125,000 miles or unlimited miles, depending on the size of the vehicle抯 battery, although the battery抯 charging capacity is not covered.

In addition to the New Vehicle Limited Warranty, we offer a comprehensive maintenance program for Model S, which includes plans covering maintenance for up to eight years or up to 100,000 miles and an Extended Service Plan. The maintenance plans cover annual inspections, 24 hour roadside assistance and the replacement of wear and tear parts, excluding tires and the battery, with either a fixed fee per visit for Tesla Ranger service or unlimited Tesla Ranger visits for a higher initial purchase price. The Extended Service Plan covers the repair or replacement of Model S parts for an additional four years or up to an additional 50,000 miles after the New Vehicle Limited Warranty.

For our Roadster customers, we provided a three year or 36,000 mile New Vehicle Limited Warranty with every Tesla Roadster, which we extended to four years or 50,000 miles for the purchasers of our 2008 Tesla Roadster. Customers have the opportunity to purchase an Extended Service Plan for the period after the end of the New Vehicle Limited Warranty to cover the repair or replacement of Roadster parts for up to an additional three years or 36,000 miles, provided they are purchased within a specified period of time. We have previously provided our Tesla Roadster customers with a battery replacement option to replace the battery in their vehicles at any time after the expiration of the New Vehicle Limited Warranty but before the tenth anniversary of the purchase date of their vehicles.

Our New Vehicle Limited Warranties and Extended Service plans are subject to certain limitations, exclusions or separate warranties, including certain wear items, such as tires, brake pads, paint and general appearance, and battery performance, and are intended to cover parts and labor to repair defects in material or workmanship in the body, chassis, suspension, interior, electronic systems, battery, powertrain and brake system. In addition, all plans must be purchased within a specified period of time after vehicle purchase.

Financial Services

We offer loans and leases in North America, Europe and Asia primarily through various financial institutions.  We also offer leases directly through our captive finance company in 37 states, the District of Columbia and in 4 provinces of Canada.  Certain of our loan programs provide customers with a resale value guarantee under which those customers have the option of selling their vehicle back to us during the period of 36 to 39 months following delivery for a pre-determined resale value. This structure allows the customer to enjoy the benefits of Model S ownership without concern for its resale value. We introduced this program in North America in 2013 and expanded it to selected European markets in 2014. In certain markets, we also offer buy back guarantees to financial institutions which obligate us to repurchase, and the institution to sell us, the vehicles for a pre-determined price. We intend to broaden our financial services offerings during the next few years.  

Manufacturing

We conduct our powertrain and vehicle manufacturing and assembly operations at our facilities in Fremont, California; Lathrop, California; and Tilburg, Netherlands.  We are also building a cell and battery manufacturing facility, the Tesla Gigafactory, outside of Reno, Nevada.  

The Tesla Factory in Fremont, CA and Manufacturing in Lathrop, CA

We manufacture Model S and certain components that are critical to our intellectual property and quality standards for Model S at the Tesla Factory. The Tesla Factory contains several manufacturing operations, including stamping, machining, casting, plastics, body assembly, paint operations, final vehicle assembly and end-of-line testing. In addition, we manufacture lithium-ion battery packs, electric motors, gearboxes and components both for our vehicles and for our original equipment manufacturer customers at the Tesla Factory. Several major component systems of our vehicles are purchased from suppliers; however we have a high level of vertical integration in our manufacturing processes at the Tesla Factory. We recently commenced production and machining of various aluminum components at our facility in Lathrop, California.

We continue to increase our production capacity at the Tesla Factory with the goal of producing Model S, Model X and Model 3 at this location.  In 2015, we intend to create a new body shop line to prepare for the expanded production of both Model S and Model X.  We are also finishing the construction of a new high volume paint shop, to be used for Model S, Model X and Model 3.  

10

 

The Netherlands

Our European headquarters is located in Amsterdam, Netherlands and houses our sales, service, and administrative functions.  We also have operations in Tilburg, Netherlands for final assembly, testing and quality control for vehicles ultimately delivered into the European Union.  The Tilburg facility also serves as a pan-European parts warehouse, remanufacturing site and customer service center.  

The Tesla Gigafactory outside of Reno, Nevada

We are developing the Tesla Gigafactory as a facility where we work together with our suppliers to integrate battery precursor material, cell, module and battery pack production in one location. We plan to use the battery packs manufactured at the Gigafactory for our vehicles and for our stationary storage applications. We broke ground on the Gigafactory in June 2014 and currently expect to produce cells at this site beginning in 2016 for use initially in Model S and Model X. The Gigafactory is currently expected to attain full production capacity in 2020, which is anticipated to be sufficient for the production of approximately 500,000 vehicles annually as well as for the production of our stationary storage applications. By the time the Gigafactory reaches full, annualized production in 2020, we expect battery pack production capacity to reach 50 GWh. Of this, we expect to build 35 GWh of cell production capacity at the Gigafactory and purchase 15 GWh of cells from other manufacturers, potentially including Panasonic.

We believe that the Gigafactory will allow us to achieve a major reduction in the cost of our battery packs of greater than 30% on a per kWh basis by the end of the first year of volume production of Model 3. The total capital expenditures associated with the Gigafactory through 2020 are expected to be $4-$5 billion, of which approximately $2 billion is expected to come from Tesla. Panasonic has agreed to partner with us on the Gigafactory with investments in production equipment that it will use to manufacture and supply us with battery cells. We have agreed to prepare and provide the land, buildings and utilities, invest in production equipment for battery module and pack production and be responsible for the overall management.  We expect to announce other partners as construction progresses.

Supply Chain

Model S uses over 3,000 purchased parts which we source globally from over 350 suppliers, the majority of whom are currently our single source suppliers for these components. We have developed close relationships with several key suppliers particularly in the procurement of cells and certain other key system parts. While we obtain components from multiple sources whenever possible, similar to other automobile manufacturers, many of the components used in our vehicles are purchased by us from a single source. In addition, while several sources of the battery cell we have selected for our battery packs are available, we have currently fully qualified only one cell. We expect to fully qualify additional cells from other manufacturers in 2015.  

We use various raw materials in our business including aluminum, steel, cobalt, nickel and copper. The prices for these raw materials fluctuate depending on market conditions and global demand for these materials. We believe that we have adequate supplies or sources of availability of the raw materials necessary to meet our manufacturing and supply requirements. There are always risks and uncertainties, however, with respect to the supply of raw materials that could impact their availability in sufficient quantities or reasonable prices to meet our needs.

Quality Control

Our quality control efforts are divided between product quality and supplier quality, both of which are focused on designing and producing products and processes with high levels of reliability. Our product quality engineers work with our engineering team and our suppliers to help ensure that the product designs meet functional specifications and durability requirements. Our supplier quality engineers work with our suppliers to ensure that their processes and systems are capable of delivering the parts we need at the required quality level, on time, and on budget.

Customers and Selected Relationships

We currently sell our cars primarily to individual customers. We have strategic or commercial relationships with Panasonic, Daimler, and Toyota.

Panasonic

Panasonic supplies us with battery cells for our battery packs and has partnered with us on the construction of the Gigafactory. In January 2010, we announced that we were collaborating with Panasonic on the development of next-generation electric vehicle cells based on the 18650 form factor and nickel-based lithium ion chemistry. In October 2011, we finalized a supply agreement for these battery cells. In October 2013, we entered into an amendment to the supply agreement to, among other things, provide for the long-term preferential prices and a minimum of 1.8 billion lithium-ion battery cells that we intend to purchase from Panasonic from 2014 through 2017.   In July 2014, Panasonic agreed to partner with us on the Gigafactory.

11

 

Daimler AG

Beginning in 2008, we commenced efforts on a powertrain development arrangement with Daimler. Since that time, we have developed and produced powertrain components for Daimler for the Smart fortwo electric drive program, the A-Class electric vehicle program and the B-Class electric vehicle program. We started to supply production parts for the B-Class electric vehicle program in 2014 and expect to continue to supply parts under this program for the next few years.  

Toyota Motor Corporation

In May 2010, we and Toyota announced our intention to cooperate on the development of electric vehicles, and for us to receive Toyota抯 support with sourcing parts and production and engineering expertise for Model S. Since that time, we have developed and produced a validated powertrain system, including a battery, power electronics module, motor, gearbox and associated software, which was integrated into an electric vehicle version of the Toyota RAV4. We began delivery of these systems to Toyota for installation into the Toyota RAV4 EV in the first half of 2012. During the third quarter of 2014, we completed the RAV4 EV program.

Governmental Programs, Incentives and Regulations

Full Repayment of United States Department of Energy Loans

In May 2013, we paid $451.8 million to settle all outstanding loan amounts due under a loan facility we had entered into with the Federal Financing Bank (FFB) and the United States Department of Energy (DOE), under the DOE抯 Advanced Technology Vehicles Manufacturing Loan Program, as set forth in Section 136 of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (ATVM Program). We refer to the loan facility with the DOE as the DOE Loan Facility.

Under the DOE Loan Facility, the FFB had made available to us two multi-draw term loan facilities in an aggregate principal amount of $465.0 million beginning on January 20, 2010. As of August 31, 2012, we had fully drawn down the aforementioned facilities. On May 22, 2013, we paid $451.8 million to fully retire our obligations under the DOE Loan Facility.

In connection with the closing of the DOE Loan Facility, we had also issued a warrant to the DOE to purchase up to 9,255,035 shares of our Series E convertible preferred stock at an exercise price of $2.51 per share. Upon the completion of our initial public offering on July 2, 2010, this preferred stock warrant became a warrant to purchase up to 3,090,111 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $7.54 per share. As a result of our repayment of all outstanding principal and interest under the DOE Loan Facility and the termination of the DOE Loan Facility in May 2013, the DOE warrant expired. Additionally, we amortized all remaining unamortized debt issuance costs related to the DOE Loan Facility.

California Alternative Energy and Advanced Transportation Financing Authority Tax Incentives

In December 2009, we finalized an arrangement with the California Alternative Energy and Advanced Transportation Financing Authority (CAEATFA) that resulted in an exemption from California state sales and use taxes for the purchase of $320 million of manufacturing equipment. As the equipment purchased would otherwise have been subject to California state sales and use tax, we believe this incentive resulted in tax savings by us of approximately $31 million over the period starting in December 2009 and ending in December 2013. The equipment purchases were used for three purposes: (i) to establish our production facility for Model S in California, (ii) to upgrade our Palo Alto powertrain production facility, and (iii) to expand our Tesla Roadster assembly operations at our Menlo Park facility. We exhausted all funds from the December 2009 approved exemption from California state sales and use taxes for $320 million of manufacturing equipment in December 2013.

In January 2012, we finalized an additional agreement with CAEATFA for an exclusion from California state sales and use taxes for the purchase of up to $292 million of manufacturing equipment. To the extent all of this equipment is purchased and would otherwise be subject to California state sales or use tax, we believe this incentive would result in tax savings by us of up to approximately $24 million over the period starting in December 2011 and ending in December 2015. The equipment purchased under this exclusion may only be used for two purposes: (i) to develop Model X and its production capacity in California and (ii) to further upgrade our powertrain production facilities in California. We have not yet exhausted the $292 million in funds approved by CAEATFA in 2012.  

In December 2013, we finalized a third agreement with CAEATFA that will result in an exclusion from California state sales and use taxes for an additional $415 million of manufacturing equipment. To the extent all of this equipment is purchased and would otherwise be subject to California state sales or use tax, we believe this 2013 incentive would result in tax savings by us of up to approximately $35 million over the period starting in December 2013 and ending in December 2016. The equipment purchased under this exclusion may only be used for three purposes: (i) to expand Model S manufacturing capacity in California; (ii) to expand electric vehicle powertrain production in California; and (iii) future Model S electric vehicle development.

12

 

Regulatory Credits

In connection with the production, delivery, and placement into service of our zero emission vehicles in global markets, we have earned and will continue to earn various tradable regulatory credits that can be sold to other manufacturers.

Under California抯 Zero-Emission Vehicle Regulations and those of states that have adopted the California standards, vehicle manufacturers are required to ensure that a portion of the vehicles delivered for sale in those states during each model year are zero-emission vehicles and partial zero-emission vehicles. Currently, the states of Arizona, California, Connecticut, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island and Vermont have such laws in effect. These laws provide that a manufacturer may earn credits, referred to as ZEV credits, if they produce more zero-emission vehicles than the minimum quantity required by those laws. Those manufacturers with a surplus of credits may sell the excess credits to other manufacturers who can then apply such credits to comply with the regulatory requirements, including making up for deficits. As a manufacturer solely of zero-emission vehicles, we have no minimum requirement, and therefore earn ZEV credits on each vehicle delivered and placed into service in such states. We have entered into agreements with other automobile manufacturers to sell the ZEV credits that we earn. Recently, California passed amendments to the ZEV mandate that would require, starting in 2018, all large-volume manufacturers (those manufacturers selling 20,000 or more vehicles in California in 2018) to increase the number of zero emission vehicles sold, such that 15.4% of each manufacturers?fleet must be made of zero emission vehicles by 2025. All states that have adopted the California program will amend their programs to conform to the new California standards.

Additionally, under the Environmental Protection Agency抯 (EPA) national greenhouse gas (GHG) emission standards and similar standards adopted by the Canadian government, car and truck manufacturers are required to meet fleet-wide average carbon dioxide emissions standards. Manufacturers who fail to meet such standards have a deficit in their emission profile.  Manufacturers whose fleet wide average performs better than such standards may earn credits. Manufacturers may sell excess credits to other manufacturers, who can use the credits to comply with these regulatory requirements. As a manufacturer solely of zero emission vehicles, we earn the full amount of GHG credits established by the standards on each vehicle sold. We have contracted with another automobile manufacturer to sell all earned credits.

Under the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration抯 (NHTSA) Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards, car and truck manufacturers are required to meet fleet-wide average fuel economy standards. Manufacturers that fail to meet such standards have a deficit in their fuel economy profile.  Manufacturers whose fleet-wide average performs better than such standards may earn credits. Manufacturers may sell excess credits to other manufacturers, who can use such credits to comply with these regulatory requirements. We have entered into agreements to sell the credits that we earn.

Regulation梀ehicle Safety and Testing

Our vehicles are subject to, and comply with or are otherwise exempt from, numerous regulatory requirements established by NHTSA, including all applicable United States Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS). The Model S fully complies with all FMVSSs without the need for any exemptions.  The Roadster complies with or is exempt from all FMVSS.

As a manufacturer, we must self-certify that our vehicles meet all applicable FMVSS, as well as the NHTSA bumper standard, or otherwise are exempt, before the vehicles can be imported or sold in the United States. Numerous FMVSS apply to our vehicles, such as crash-worthiness requirements, crash avoidance requirements, and electric vehicle requirements. We are also required to comply with other federal laws administered by NHTSA, including the CAFE standards, Theft Prevention Act requirements, consumer information labeling requirements, Early Warning Reporting requirements regarding warranty claims, field reports, death and injury reports and foreign recalls, and owner抯 manual requirements.

The Automobile Information and Disclosure Act requires manufacturers of motor vehicles to disclose certain information regarding the manufacturer抯 suggested retail price, optional equipment and pricing. In addition, the Act allows inclusion of city and highway fuel economy ratings, as determined by EPA, as well as crash test ratings as determined by NHTSA if such tests are conducted.

Our vehicles sold in outside of the U.S. are subject to foreign safety testing regulations. Many of those regulations are different from the federal motor vehicle safety standards applicable in the United States and may require redesign and/or retesting.

Regulation桬PA Emissions & Certificate of Conformity

The Clean Air Act requires that we obtain both an EPA-issued Certificate of Conformity and a California Air Resources Board (CARB)-issued Executive Order with respect to emissions for our vehicles. The Certificate of Conformity is required for vehicles sold in states covered by the Clean Air Act抯 standards and both the Certificate of Conformity and the Executive Order are required for vehicles sold in states that have sought and received a waiver from the EPA to utilize California standards. The California standards for emissions control for certain regulated pollutants for new vehicles and engines sold in California are set by CARB. States that have adopted the California standards as approved by EPA also recognize the Executive Order for sales of vehicles.

13

 

Regulation桞attery Safety and Testing

Our battery pack conforms to mandatory regulations that govern transport of 揹angerous goods? defined to include lithium-ion batteries, which may present a risk in transportation. The governing regulations, issued by the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), are based on the United Nations (UN) Recommendations and Model Regulations on the Transport of Dangerous Goods, as well as related UN Manual Tests and Criteria. The regulations vary by mode of shipping transportation, such as by ocean vessel, rail, truck, or air. We have completed the applicable transportation tests for our prototype and production battery packs, demonstrating our compliance with the UN Manual of Tests and Criteria. We also subject our battery packs to the appropriate tests specified in the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) J2464 and J2929 standards, which incorporate tests such as immersion, humidity, and exposure to fire.

We use lithium metal oxide cells in our high voltage battery packs. The cells do not contain any lead, mercury, cadmium, other hazardous materials, heavy metals, or toxic materials. Our battery packs include certain packaging materials that contain trace amounts of hazardous chemicals whose use, storage, and disposal is regulated under federal law. We currently have an agreement with a third party battery recycling company to recycle our battery packs. If a customer wishes to dispose of a battery pack from one of our vehicles, we anticipate accepting the depleted battery from the customer without any additional charge.

Automobile Manufacturer and Dealer Regulation

State laws regulate the manufacture, distribution, and sale of automobiles, and generally require motor vehicle manufacturers and dealers to be licensed in order to sell vehicles directly to consumers in the state. As we open additional Tesla stores and service centers, we secure dealer licenses (or their equivalent) and engage in sales activities to sell our vehicles directly to consumers. A few states, such as Texas and Michigan, do not permit automobile manufacturers to be licensed as dealers or to act in the capacity of a dealer, or otherwise restrict a manufacturer抯 ability to deliver or service vehicles. To sell vehicles to residents of states where we are not licensed as a dealer, we must generally conduct the sale out of the state via the internet, phone or mail. In such states, we have opened 揼alleries?that serve an educational purpose and are not retail locations.  

As we expand our retail footprint in the United States, some automobile dealer trade associations have both challenged the legality of our operations in court and used administrative and legislative processes to attempt to prohibit or limit our ability to operate existing stores or expand to new locations. Although we have thus far prevailed in every lawsuit brought by dealer associations, we expect that the dealer associations will continue to mount challenges to our business model. In addition, we expect the dealer associations to actively lobbying state Governors and legislators to interpret existing laws or enact new laws in ways not favorable to Tesla抯 ownership and operation of its own retail and service locations.

While we have analyzed the principal laws in the US, EU, China, Japan, UK, and Australia relating to our distribution model and believe we comply with such laws, we have not performed a complete analysis of all jurisdictions in which we may sell vehicles. Accordingly, there may be laws in certain jurisdictions that may restrict our sales and service operations.

Competition

The worldwide automotive market, particularly for alternative fuel vehicles, is highly competitive today and we expect it will become even more so in the future as we introduce additional, lower priced vehicles such as our Model 3. We believe the impact of new regulatory requirements for occupant safety and vehicle emissions, technological advances in powertrain and consumer electronics components, and shifting customer needs and expectations are causing the industry to evolve in the direction of electric-based vehicles. We believe the primary competitive factors in our markets include but are not limited to:

?

technological innovation;

?

product quality and safety;

?

service options;

?

product performance;

?

design and styling;

?

brand perception;

?

product price; and

?

manufacturing efficiency.

We believe that our vehicles compete in the market both based on their traditional segment classification as well as based on their propulsion technology. For example, Model S competes primarily in the extremely competitive premium sedan market with internal combustion vehicles from more established automobile manufacturers, including Audi, BMW, Lexus and Mercedes. Our vehicles also compete with vehicles propelled by alternative fuels, principally electricity.  

14

 

Many established and new automobile manufacturers have entered or have announced plans to enter the alternative fuel vehicle market. BMW, Daimler, Nissan, Fiat, Ford and Mitsubishi, among others, have electric vehicles available today. Moreover, Porsche, Lexus, Audi, Volkswagen and Volvo are also developing electric vehicles. Electric vehicles have also already been brought to market in China and other foreign countries and we expect a number of those manufacturers to enter the United States market as well.  In addition, several manufacturers, including General Motors, Toyota, Ford, and Honda, are each selling hybrid vehicles, and certain of these manufacturers have announced plug-in versions of their hybrid vehicles.

Most of our current and potential competitors have significantly greater resources than we do, may be able to devote greater resources to the manufacture, sale and support of their products, and have other advantages. We believe our exclusive focus on electric vehicles and electric vehicle components, as well as our history of vehicle development and production, however, are the basis on which we can compete in the global automotive market in spite of the challenges posed by our competition.

Intellectual Property

As part of our business, we seek to protect our intellectual property rights in various ways, including through trademarks, copyrights, trade secrets, including know-how, patents, patent applications, employee and third party nondisclosure agreements, intellectual property licenses and other contractual rights. Additionally, consistent with our mission to accelerate the advent of sustainable transport, we announced a patent policy in which we irrevocably pledged that we will not initiate a lawsuit against any party for infringing our patents through activity relating to electric vehicles or related equipment for so long as such party is acting in good faith.  We made this pledge in order to encourage the advancement of a common, rapidly-evolving platform for electric vehicles, thereby benefiting ourselves, other companies making electric vehicles, and the world.

Segment Information

We have determined that we operate as one reportable segment, which is the design, development, manufacturing and sales of electric vehicles and electric powertrain components. For information regarding financial data by geographic areas, see Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.

Employees

As of December 31, 2014, we had 10,161 full-time employees. To date, we have not experienced any work stoppages, and we consider our relationship with our employees to be good.

Available Information

We file or furnish periodic reports and amendments thereto, including our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K; proxy statements and other information with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Such reports, amendments, proxy statements and other information may be obtained by visiting the Public Reference Room of the SEC at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, D.C. 20549. Information on the operation of the Public Reference Room can be obtained by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. In addition, the SEC maintains a website (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file electronically. Our reports, amendments thereto, proxy statements and other information are also made available, free of charge, on our investor relations website at ir.teslamotors.com as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file or furnish such information with the SEC. The information posted on our website is not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K.

 

 

ITEM 1A.

RISK FACTORS

You should carefully consider the risks described below together with the other information set forth in this report, which could materially affect our business, financial condition and future results. The risks described below are not the only risks facing our company. Risks and uncertainties not currently known to us or that we currently deem to be immaterial also may materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and operating results.

15

 

Risks Related to Our Business and Industry  

We may experience significant delays or other complications in the design, manufacture, launch and production ramp of Model X, as well as future vehicles such as Model 3, which could harm our brand, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.  

We may experience significant delays or other complications in bringing new vehicles to market. For example, while we expect Model X deliveries to start in the third quarter of 2015, refinements resulting from ongoing development and extensive testing of this vehicle could result in delays in its introduction.  Complications could also arise from other factors, including the expansion of our production capacity required to bring Model X to market, finalization of it supply chain, and completion of regulatory approvals.  Ahead of the Model X launch, we plan to expand capacity in several areas for our current and future vehicles, including installing a state of the art, highly automated casting and machining operation for various aluminum components for our vehicles, increasing production on our new drive unit line, installing a new robotic body assembly shop for Model X production and commissioning a new paint facility.  Our suppliers may not be able to provide components in a timely manner, at an acceptable price or in the necessary quantities. Finally, we will also need to do extensive testing to ensure that Model X is in compliance with applicable NHTSA safety regulations and obtain EPA and CARB certification to emission regulations prior to beginning volume production and delivery of the vehicles.

We, as well as other automobile manufacturers, have experienced delays or other complications in connection with new vehicle models. In 2012, we experienced delays in the production ramp of Model S and in 2014, we delayed the start of production ramp of All-Wheel Drive Dual Motor Model S.  Any significant delay or other complication in the development, manufacture, launch and production ramp of Model X or our future vehicles, including complications associated with expanding our production capacity, supply chain or regulatory approvals, could materially damage our brand, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. 

Our long-term success will be dependent upon our ability to design, build and achieve market acceptance of new vehicle models, specifically Model S and new vehicle models such as Model X and Model 3.

Our long-term success is dependent on market acceptance of the Model S sedan and future electric vehicles we introduce. In the United States, there is no guarantee that Model S will continue to be successfully accepted by the general public, especially in the long-term. As we expand in Europe and Asia, there is no guarantee that customers in these markets will embrace our vehicles and if they do not, demand for our vehicles could be lower than our expectations.

Moreover, there can be no assurance that we will be able to design future electric vehicles that will meet the expectations of our customers or that our future models, including the Model X crossover, will become commercially viable. To date, we have publicly revealed only an early prototype of the Model X. Work continues on the finalization of Model X with Beta Model X vehicles undergoing extensive testing. To the extent that we are not able to build Model X in accordance with the expectations created by the early prototype and our announced specifications and schedule, customers may cancel their reservations, our future sales could be harmed and investors may lose confidence in us.

In addition, we have also announced our intent to develop Model 3 which we expect to produce at the Tesla Factory after the introduction of Model X. We intend to offer this vehicle at a lower price point and expect to produce it at higher volumes than our Model S. Importantly, we anticipate producing Model 3 for the mass market and thus we will need a high-volume supply of lithium-ion cells at reasonable prices.

While we intend each of our production vehicles and their variants to meet a distinct segment of the automotive market, our vehicles may end up competing with each other which may delay sales and associated revenue to future periods. Also, if we fail to accurately anticipate demand for each of our vehicles, this could result in inefficient expenditures and production delays. Furthermore, historically, automobile customers have come to expect new and improved vehicle models to be introduced frequently. In order to meet these expectations, we may be required to introduce on a regular basis new vehicle models as well as enhanced versions of existing vehicle models. As automotive technologies change, including those specific to electric vehicles, we anticipate our customers will expect us to upgrade or adapt our vehicles and introduce new models in order to continue to provide vehicles with the latest technology. To date, we have limited experience simultaneously designing, testing, manufacturing, upgrading, adapting and selling our electric vehicles as well as limited experience allocating our available resources among the design and production of multiple vehicles.

16

 

We may be unable to increase production and deliveries of Model S in line with our plans, both of which could harm our business and prospects.

Since we began manufacturing and delivering Model S in 2012, we have significantly increased production and deliveries, and our plans call for an even greater increase in production and deliveries going forward. As part of this effort, we recently completed a new final assembly line and added more automation to our body shop at the Fremont factory, are installing a highly automated casting and machining operation for various aluminum components and are finishing the construction of a new high volume paint shop. Our ability to further ramp-up high volume Model S production, including for the All-Wheel Drive Dual Motor Model S, which we recently began producing for the first time, will depend upon a number of factors, including our ability to use these new manufacturing processes as planned while maintaining our desired quality levels, our suppliers?ability to deliver quality parts to us in a timely manner, and efficiently making design changes to ensure consistently high quality. To produce a vehicle that meets our quality standards requires us to carefully analyze each step of our production plan, improve the efficiency of our manufacturing processes and continue to train our employees. Our suppliers also must produce new products in sufficient quantities and quality to meet our demand. Certain suppliers have experienced delays in meeting our demand or have sought to renegotiate the terms of the supply arrangements, and we continue to focus on supplier capabilities and constraints. Any disruption in increasing our production level of Model S in line with our plans could materially damage our brand, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

In addition, for Model S we have introduced a number of new manufacturing technologies and techniques, such as aluminum spot welding systems, which have not been widely adopted in the automotive industry; and the Model S has a number of new and unique design features, such as a 17 inch display screen, retractable exterior door handles, and all-new dual motor and autopilot hardware, each of which poses unique manufacturing challenges. Model S production and deliveries will continue to require significant resources and we may experience unexpected delays or difficulties that could harm our ability to maintain full manufacturing capacity for Model S, or cause us to miss planned production targets, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results. Additionally, sustaining high volume production and doing so in a manner that avoids significant cost overruns, including as a result of factors beyond our control such as problems with suppliers and vendors, may be difficult.

Concurrent with the significant increase in our planned production levels, we will also need to continue to significantly increase our deliveries of Model S vehicles. We have limited experience in delivering a high volume of Model S vehicles, and, in particular, to locations outside of the United States. We may face difficulties meeting our delivery and growth plans in Asia and the right hand drive markets we have entered, which may impact our ability to achieve our worldwide delivery goals. If we are unable to ramp up to meet our delivery goals globally to match our production rate of Model S, this could result in negative publicity, damage our brand and have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Our ability to grow volume production and deliveries for Model S is subject to certain risks and uncertainties, including:

?

that our suppliers will be able and willing to deliver components on a timely basis and in the necessary quantities, quality and at acceptable prices to produce Model S in volume and reach our financial targets;

?

that we will be able to complete any necessary adjustments to the vehicle design or manufacturing processes of Model S in a timely manner that meets our production plan and allows for high quality vehicles;

?

that we will be able to fully ramp production of All-Wheel Drive Dual Motor Model S to keep up with demand;

?

that we will be able to ramp sales of Model S throughout Asia, pursuant to our current timeline;

?

that we will be able to adequately respond in a timely manner to any problems that may arise with our vehicles;

?

that we will be able to schedule and complete deliveries at our planned higher volume production levels;

?

that the equipment or tooling which we have purchased or which we select, including those that are part of our higher capacity production line that recently became operational, will be able to accurately manufacture the vehicle within specified design tolerances, and will not suffer from unexpected breakdowns or damage which could negatively affect the rate needed to produce vehicles in volume;

?

that we will be able to comply with environmental, workplace safety, customs and similar regulations required to operate our manufacturing facilities;

?

that we will be able to maintain and improve quality controls as we transition to a higher level of in-house manufacturing process; and

?

that the information technology systems that we are currently expanding and improving upon will be effective to manage higher volume production.

Finally, detailed long-term testing of quality, reliability and durability of Model S is ongoing and any negative results from such testing could cause production or delivery delays, cost increases, or lower quality of our Model S vehicles.

17

 

Problems or delays in bringing the Gigafactory online and operating it in line with our expectations could negatively affect us.

To lower the cost of cell production and produce cells in volume to allow us to grow quickly, we intend to integrate the production of lithium-ion cells and finished battery packs for our vehicles at our new Gigafactory. Our Gigafactory plan, however, is at an early stage. While we recently entered into various formal agreements with Panasonic on the Gigafactory, we have very little experience in building a factory of the size and scope planned for the Gigafactory, and no experience directly in the production of lithium-ion cells. In addition, to date we have not finalized agreements with additional Gigafactory partners that will be co-located at the Gigafactory. Also, the cost of building and operating the Gigafactory could exceed our current expectations and the Gigafactory may take longer to bring online than we anticipate. If we are unable to build the Gigafactory in a timely manner to produce high volumes of quality lithium-ion cells at reasonable prices, then our ability to supply battery packs to our vehicles, including Model 3, according to our schedule and/or at a price that allows us to sell them profitably and in the quantities we estimate could be constrained. Any such problems or delays with Gigafactory could negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

If our vehicles or vehicles that contain our powertrains fail to perform as expected, or if we suffer product recalls, our ability to develop, market and sell our electric vehicles could be harmed.

Our vehicles or vehicles that contain our powertrains such as the Toyota RAV4 EV or the Mercedes-Benz B-Class EV may contain defects in design and manufacture that may cause them not to perform as expected or that may require repair. For example, our vehicles are highly dependent on software to operate. Software products are inherently complex and often contain defects and errors when first introduced, and changes to software may have unexpected effects. Model S issues experienced by customers include those related to the software for the 17 inch display screen, the panoramic roof and the 12 volt battery. Although we attempt to remedy the Model S issues experienced by our customers in a rapid manner, such efforts may not be timely or up to the satisfaction of our customers.

While we have performed extensive internal testing, we currently have a limited frame of reference by which to evaluate the long-term performance of our battery packs, powertrains and vehicles. Specifically, we have only a limited amount of data by which to evaluate Model S, upon which our business prospects depend, due to the fact that we only recently began production in June 2012. There can be no assurance that we will be able to detect and fix any defects in the vehicles prior to their sale to consumers.

We have experienced product recalls, including in May 2009, October 2010, and June 2013, all of which were unrelated to our electric powertrain. In May 2009, we initiated a product recall after we determined that a condition caused by insufficient torqueing of the rear inner hub flange bolt existed in some of our Tesla Roadsters, as a result of a missed process during the manufacture of the Tesla Roadster glider, which is the partially assembled Tesla Roadster that does not contain our electric powertrain. In October 2010, we initiated a product recall for some of our Tesla Roadsters after the 12 volt, low voltage auxiliary cable in a single vehicle chafed against the edge of a carbon fiber panel in the vehicle causing a short, smoke and possible fire behind the right front headlamp of the vehicle. In June 2013, we initiated a recall of slightly more than a thousand Model S vehicles to inspect and repair rear seat strikers that may have been compromised during the assembly process. Rear seat strikers are used to retain the rear seat backs in an upright position. Failure of this component may have resulted in the collapse of the rear seat back during a crash. Although the cost of this recall was not material, and limited to a small number of total Model S抯 produced, we may experience additional recalls in the future, which could adversely affect our brand in our target markets, as well as our business, prospects and results of operations.

In January 2014 we implemented a firmware update to address issues with certain Universal Mobile Connector NEMA 14-50 adapters, which are part of the charging units and are not part of the vehicles themselves, potentially overheating during charging. We further announced that we would provide upgraded NEMA 14-50 adapters to our customers as an additional safeguard. If such measures do not adequately address the underlying concerns, our business, prospects and results of operations could be harmed.

Our electric vehicles may not perform consistent with customers?expectations or consistent with other vehicles currently available. For example, our electric vehicles may not have the durability or longevity of current vehicles, and may not be as easy to repair as other vehicles currently on the market. Additionally, while Model S recently achieved an overall five star safety rating by NHTSA, there is no guarantee that future model years or variants or other Tesla vehicles will also attain such safety ratings, and any such rating is not a guarantee of safe product design or that any individual vehicle will be free of any defect or failure.

Any product defects or any other failure of our performance electric vehicles to perform as expected could harm our reputation and result in adverse publicity, lost revenue, delivery delays, product recalls, product liability claims, harm to our brand and reputation, and significant warranty and other expenses, and could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, operating results and prospects.

18

 

We are dependent on our suppliers, the majority of which are single source suppliers, and the inability of these suppliers to continue to deliver, or their refusal to deliver, necessary components of our vehicles in a timely manner at prices, quality levels, and volumes acceptable to us would have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.

Model S contains numerous purchased parts which we source globally from over 300 direct suppliers, the majority of whom are currently single source suppliers for these components. We expect that Model X will be sourced in an approximately similar manner. While we obtain components from multiple sources whenever possible, similar to other automobile manufacturers, the majority of the components used in our vehicles are purchased by us from single sources. To date we have not qualified alternative sources for most of the single sourced components used in our vehicles and we do not maintain long-term agreements with a number of our suppliers.

While we believe that we may be able to establish alternate supply relationships and can obtain or engineer replacement components for our single source components, we may be unable to do so in the short term, or at all, at prices or costs that are favorable to us. In particular, while we believe that we will be able to secure alternate sources of supply for most of our single sourced components in a relatively short time frame, qualifying alternate suppliers or developing our own replacements for certain highly customized components of our vehicles may be time consuming, costly and may force us to make additional modifications to a vehicle抯 design.

This limited supply chain exposes us to multiple potential sources of delivery failure or component shortages for our vehicles, as well as for our powertrain component sales activities. For example, earthquakes similar to the one that occurred in Japan in March 2011 or labor issues such as work stoppages or strikes at the ports on the west coast could negatively impact our supply chain. We have in the past experienced source disruptions in our supply chains, including those relating to our slower-than-anticipated ramp in our Model S production goals for 2012. We may experience additional delays in the future with respect to Model S, Model X and any other future vehicle we may produce.

In addition, because we have written agreements in place with the majority, but not all, of our suppliers, this may create uncertainty regarding a supplier抯 obligations to us, including but not limited to, those regarding warranty and product liability. Changes in business conditions, wars, governmental changes and other factors beyond our control or which we do not presently anticipate, could also affect our suppliers?ability to deliver components to us on a timely basis. Furthermore, if we experience significantly increased demand, or need to replace certain existing suppliers, there can be no assurance that additional supplies of component parts will be available when required on terms that are favorable to us, at all, or that any supplier would allocate sufficient supplies to us in order to meet our requirements or fill our orders in a timely manner. In the past, we have replaced certain suppliers because of their failure to provide components that met our quality control standards. The loss of any single or limited source supplier or the disruption in the supply of components from these suppliers could lead to delays in vehicle deliveries to our customers, which could hurt our relationships with our customers and also materially and adversely affect our financial condition and operating results.

Changes in our supply chain have resulted in the past, and may result in the future, in increased cost and delay. We have also experienced cost increases from certain of our suppliers in order to meet our quality targets and development timelines as well as due to design changes that we made, and we may experience similar cost increases in the future. Additionally, we are negotiating with existing suppliers for cost reductions, seeking new and less expensive suppliers for certain parts, and attempting to redesign certain parts to make them cheaper to produce. If we are unsuccessful in our efforts to control and reduce supplier costs, our operating results will suffer. Additionally, cost reduction efforts may interrupt or harm our normal production processes, thereby harming vehicle quality or reducing Model S production output.

Furthermore, a failure by our suppliers to provide the components in a timely manner or at the level of quality necessary to manufacture our performance electric vehicles could prevent us from fulfilling customer orders in a timely fashion which could result in negative publicity, damage our brand and have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Finally, in October 2013, we entered into an amendment to our existing supply agreement with Panasonic Corporation in order to address our anticipated short- to medium-term lithium-ion battery cell needs. While we expect that this supply agreement, as amended, will provide us with sufficient cells for the next few years, we may not be able to meet our long-term needs, including for Model 3 and other programs we may introduce, without securing additional suppliers or other sources for cells. We have recently signed an agreement with Panasonic to be our partner in the Gigafactory and be responsible for, among other things, manufacturing cells from there for use in our products. If we encounter unexpected difficulties with our current suppliers, including Panasonic, and if we are unable to fill these needs from other suppliers, we could experience production delays, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.

19

 

Our future growth is dependent upon consumers?willingness to adopt electric vehicles.

Our growth is highly dependent upon the adoption by consumers of, and we are subject to an elevated risk of any reduced demand for, alternative fuel vehicles in general and electric vehicles in particular. If the market for electric vehicles in North America, Europe and Asia does not develop as we expect, or develops more slowly than we expect, our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results will be harmed. The market for alternative fuel vehicles is relatively new, rapidly evolving, characterized by rapidly changing technologies, price competition, additional competitors, evolving government regulation and industry standards, frequent new vehicle announcements and changing consumer demands and behaviors.

Other factors that may influence the adoption of alternative fuel vehicles, and specifically electric vehicles, include:

?

perceptions about electric vehicle quality, safety (in particular with respect to lithium-ion battery packs), design, performance and cost, especially if adverse events or accidents occur that are linked to the quality or safety of electric vehicles, such as those related to the Chevrolet Volt battery pack fires or incidents involving Model S;

?

perceptions about vehicle safety in general, in particular safety issues that may be attributed to the use of advanced technology, including vehicle electronics and regenerative braking systems;

?

negative perceptions of electric vehicles, such as that they are more expensive than non-electric vehicles and are only affordable with government subsidies;

?

the limited range over which electric vehicles may be driven on a single battery charge and the effects of weather on this range;

?

the decline of an electric vehicle抯 range resulting from deterioration over time in the battery抯 ability to hold a charge;

?

varied calculations for driving ranges achievable by EVs, which is inherently difficult given numerous factors affecting battery range;

?

concerns about electric grid capacity and reliability, which could derail our past and present efforts to promote electric vehicles as a practical solution to vehicles which require gasoline;

?

concerns by potential customers that if their battery pack is not charged properly, it may become unusable and may need to be replaced;

?

the availability of alternative fuel vehicles, including plug-in hybrid electric vehicles;

?

improvements in the fuel economy of the internal combustion engine;

?

the availability of service for electric vehicles;

?

consumers?desire and ability to purchase a luxury automobile or one that is perceived as exclusive;

?

the environmental consciousness of consumers;

?

volatility in the cost of oil and gasoline;

?

consumers?perceptions of the dependency of the United States on oil from unstable or hostile countries;

?

government regulations and economic incentives promoting fuel efficiency and alternate forms of energy as well as tax and other governmental incentives to purchase and operate electric vehicles;

?

access to charging facilities, standardization of electric vehicle charging systems and consumers?perceptions about convenience and cost to charge an electric vehicle; and

?

perceptions about and the actual cost of alternative fuel.

In addition, reports have suggested the potential for extreme temperatures to affect the range or performance of electric vehicles, and based on our own internal testing, we estimate that our vehicles may experience a material reduction in range when operated in extremely cold temperatures. To the extent customers have concerns about such reductions or third party reports which suggest reductions in range greater than our estimates gain widespread acceptance, our ability to market and sell our vehicles, particularly in colder climates, may be adversely impacted.

20

 

Additionally, we will become subject to regulations that require us to alter the design of our vehicles, which could negatively impact consumer interest in our vehicles. For example, our electric vehicles make less noise than internal combustion vehicles. Due to concerns about quiet vehicles and vision impaired pedestrians, in January 2011, Congress passed and the President signed the Pedestrian Safety Enhancement Act of 2010. The new law requires NHTSA to establish minimum sounds for electric vehicles and hybrid electric vehicles when travelling at low speeds. NHTSA issued a notice of proposed rulemaking in 2013 and plans to finalize a rule as soon as sometime in 2015 with a potential effective date for implementation as early as 2018. This will begin a three year phase-in schedule for establishing these minimum sounds in all electric and hybrid electric vehicles. Adding this artificial noise may cause current or potential customers not to purchase our electric vehicles, which would materially and adversely affect our business, operating results, financial condition and prospects.

If we fail to manage future growth effectively as we rapidly grow our company, especially internationally, we may not be able to produce, market, sell and service our vehicles successfully.

Any failure to manage our growth effectively could materially and adversely affect our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. We continue to expand our operations significantly in North America as well as in Europe and Asia. Our future operating results depend to a large extent on our ability to manage this expansion and growth successfully. Risks that we face in undertaking this global expansion include:

?

finding and training new personnel, especially in new markets such as Europe and Asia;

?

controlling expenses and investments in anticipation of expanded operations;

?

establishing or expanding sales, service and Supercharger facilities in a timely manner;

?

adapting our products to meet local requirements in countries around the world; and

?

implementing and enhancing manufacturing, logistics and administrative infrastructure, systems and processes.

We intend to continue to hire a significant number of additional personnel, including manufacturing personnel, design personnel, engineers and service technicians. Because our high-performance vehicles are based on a different technology platform than traditional internal combustion engines, we may not be able to hire individuals with sufficient training in electric vehicles, and we will need to expend significant time and expense training the employees we do hire. Competition for individuals with experience designing, manufacturing and servicing electric vehicles is intense, and we may not be able to attract, assimilate, train or retain additional highly qualified personnel in the future, the failure of which could seriously harm our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition.

If we are unable to adequately reduce the manufacturing costs of Model S, control manufacturing costs for Model X or otherwise control the costs associated with operating our business, our financial condition and operating results will suffer.

Our production costs for Model S were high initially due to start-up costs at the Tesla Factory, manufacturing inefficiencies including low absorption of fixed manufacturing costs, higher logistics costs due to the immaturity of our supply chain, and higher initial prices for component parts during the initial period after the launch and ramp of Model S. As we have gradually ramped production of Model S, manufacturing costs per vehicle have decreased. While we expect further cost reductions to be realized by both us and our suppliers during the next several quarters, there is no guarantee we will be able to achieve sufficient cost savings to reach our gross margin and profitability goals.

We incur significant costs related to procuring the raw materials required to manufacture our high-performance electric cars, assembling vehicles and compensating our personnel. We may also incur substantial costs or cost overruns in increasing the production capability of Model S and powertrain manufacturing facilities and the recent launch in Asia. Furthermore, if we are unable to produce Model X pursuant to our plan due to cost overruns or other unexpected costs, we may not be able to meet our gross margin targets.

Furthermore, many of the factors that impact our operating costs are beyond our control. For example, the costs of our raw materials and components, such as lithium-ion battery cells or aluminum used to produce body panels, could increase due to shortages as global demand for these products increases. Indeed, if the popularity of electric vehicles exceeds current expectations without significant expansion in battery cell production capacity and advancements in battery cell technology, shortages could occur which would result in increased material costs to us or potentially limit our ability to expand production. Additionally, we may be required to incur substantial marketing costs and expenses to promote our vehicles, including through the use of traditional media such as television, radio and print, even though our marketing expenses to date have been relatively limited as we have to date relied upon unconventional marketing efforts. If we are unable to keep our operating costs aligned with the level of revenues we generate, our operating results, business and prospects will be harmed.

21

 

We may fail to meet our publicly announced guidance or other expectations about our business, which would cause our stock price to decline.

We occasionally provide guidance regarding our expected financial and business performance, such as projections regarding the number of vehicles we hope to sell, produce or deliver in future periods and anticipated future revenues, gross margins, profitability and cash flows. Correctly identifying the key factors affecting business conditions and predicting future events is inherently an uncertain process. Our guidance is based in part on assumptions which include, but are not limited to, assumptions regarding:

?

our ability to achieve anticipated production and sales volumes and projected average sales prices for Model S and Model X in North America, Europe and Asia;

?

supplier and commodity-related costs; and

?

planned cost reductions.

Such guidance may not always be accurate or may vary from actual results due to our inability to meet our assumptions and the impact on our financial performance that could occur as a result of the various risks and uncertainties to our business as set forth in these risk factors, or because of the way that applicable accounting rules require us to treat new product and service offerings that we may offer. We offer no assurance that such guidance will ultimately be accurate, and investors should treat any such guidance with appropriate caution. If we fail to meet our guidance or if we find it necessary to revise such guidance, even if such failure or revision is seemingly insignificant, investors and analysts may lose confidence in us and the market value of our common stock could be materially and adversely affected.

Our vehicles make use of lithium-ion battery cells, which have been observed to catch fire or vent smoke and flame, and such events have raised concerns, and future events may lead to additional concerns, about the batteries used in automotive applications.

The battery pack in our vehicles and the battery packs that we sell to Toyota and Daimler make use of lithium-ion cells. On rare occasions, lithium-ion cells can rapidly release the energy they contain by venting smoke and flames in a manner that can ignite nearby materials as well as other lithium-ion cells. Extremely rare incidents of laptop computers, cell phones and electric vehicle battery packs catching fire have focused consumer attention on the safety of these cells.

These events have raised concerns about the batteries used in automotive applications. To address these questions and concerns, a number of cell manufacturers are pursuing alternative lithium-ion battery cell chemistries to improve safety. We have designed the battery pack to passively contain any single cell抯 release of energy without spreading to neighboring cells. However, we have delivered only a limited number of our vehicles to customers and have limited field experience with them. We have also only delivered a limited number of battery packs to Toyota and Daimler. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that a field or testing failure of our vehicles or other battery packs that we produce will not occur, which could damage the vehicle or lead to personal injury or death and may subject us to lawsuits. We may have to recall our vehicles or participate in a recall of a vehicle that contains our battery packs, and redesign our battery packs, which would be time consuming and expensive. Also, negative public perceptions regarding the suitability of lithium-ion cells for automotive applications or any future incident involving lithium-ion cells such as a vehicle or other fire, even if such incident does not involve us, could seriously harm our business.

In addition, we store a significant number of lithium-ion cells at our manufacturing facility. Any mishandling of battery cells may cause disruption to the operation of our facilities. While we have implemented safety procedures related to the handling of the cells, there can be no assurance that a safety issue or fire related to the cells would not disrupt our operations. Such damage or injury would likely lead to adverse publicity and potentially a safety recall. Moreover, any failure of a competitor抯 electric vehicle, especially those that use a high volume of commodity cells similar to Tesla抯 vehicles, may cause indirect adverse publicity for us and our electric vehicles. Such adverse publicity would negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

We have a history of losses and have to deliver significant cost reductions to achieve sustained, long-term profitability and long-term commercial success.

We have had net losses on a GAAP basis in each quarter since our inception, except for the first quarter of 2013. Even if we are able to continue to increase Model S production and sales and begin to produce and sell Model X and future vehicles, there can be no assurance that we will be profitable. In order to achieve profitability as well as long-term commercial success, we must continue to achieve our planned cost reductions, control our operational costs while producing quality vehicles, increase our production rate, maintain strong demand in North America, and grow demand abroad in Europe and Asia. Failure to do one or more of these things could prevent us from achieving sustained, long-term profitability.

22

 

Foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar could harm our financial results.

Our revenues and costs denominated in foreign currencies are not completely matched. As we have increased Model S deliveries in markets outside of the United States, we have much higher revenues than costs denominated in other currencies such as the euro, Norwegian kroner, and Chinese yuan.  The recent strengthening of the U.S. dollar therefore has reduced, and any further strengthening of the U.S. dollar would tend to further reduce, our revenues as measured in U.S. dollars. In addition, a portion of our costs and expenses have been, and we anticipate will continue to be, denominated in foreign currencies, including the Japanese yen. If we do not have fully offsetting revenues in these currencies and if the value of the U.S. dollar depreciates significantly against these currencies, our costs as measured in U.S. dollars as a percent of our revenues will correspondingly increase and our margins will suffer. As a result, our operating results could be adversely affected.

The introduction of our resale value guarantee and leasing programs may result in lower revenues and profits and exposes us to resale risk to the extent many customers elect to return their vehicles to us and the residual values are lower than our estimates.

In 2013 we began offering a resale value guarantee to all customers who purchased a Model S in the United States and Canada and financed their vehicle through one of our specified commercial banking partners. In April and October of 2014, we started offering leasing to business customers and individual customers, respectively, including through Tesla Finance, our captive finance company. Both the resale value guarantee program and leasing offered through Tesla Finance generate lower revenues in the period the car is delivered as compared to cash purchases and both expose us to the risk that any vehicles repurchased or returned to us under the programs may be resold by us for prices less than we estimate.

Under the resale value guarantee program, Model S customers have the option of selling their vehicle back to us during the period of 36 to 39 months following delivery for a pre-determined resale value. As a result of this resale value guarantee and customers having the option of selling their vehicles to us, we apply lease accounting to such purchases, which defers the recognition of the associated revenues over time instead of full recognition at vehicle delivery. Although the resale value guarantee does not impact our cash flows and liquidity at the time of vehicle delivery, a significant uptake under this program could have a significant adverse impact on our near term GAAP revenues and operating results.

Under the leasing program offered through Tesla Finance, we lease vehicles directly to customers. Customers have the option of purchasing their vehicles at the stated value in the leasing contract or returning their vehicles to us. We apply lease accounting to such purchases. Unlike the resale value guarantee program, we may receive only a very small portion of the price of the vehicle from our customers at the time of purchase, and instead will receive a stream of lease payments. To the extent we expand this program and are unable to secure appropriate financing, our cash flow and liquidity, as well as our near term GAAP revenues and operating results, could be negatively impacted. Furthermore, we are exposed to credit risk that customers may not pay their lease payments on time and according to the terms of our leasing contracts.

Under both programs, we are exposed to the risk that the vehicles?resale value may be lower than our estimates and the volume of vehicles returned to us may be higher than our estimates, which could impact our future cash flows and/or profitability. Currently, there is only a very limited secondary market for our electric vehicles on which to base our estimates, and such a secondary market may not develop in the future. Our residual value and return volume estimates could prove to be incorrect, either of which could harm our financial condition and operating results.

Increases in costs, disruption of supply or shortage of raw materials, in particular lithium-ion cells, could harm our business.

We may experience increases in the cost or a sustained interruption in the supply or shortage of raw materials. Any such increase or supply interruption could materially and negatively impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. We use various raw materials in our business including aluminum, steel, nickel and copper. The prices for these raw materials fluctuate depending on market conditions and global demand for these materials and could adversely affect our business and operating results. For instance, we are exposed to multiple risks relating to lithium-ion cells. These risks include:

?

the inability or unwillingness of current battery manufacturers to build or operate battery cell manufacturing plants to supply the numbers of lithium-ion cells required to support the growth of the electric or plug-in hybrid vehicle industry as demand for such cells increases;

?

disruption in the supply of cells due to quality issues or recalls by battery cell manufacturers;

?

an increase in the cost of raw materials, such as nickel used in lithium-ion cells, or aluminum used in the body of Model S; and

?

fluctuations in the value of the Japanese yen against the U.S. dollar as our battery cell purchases are currently denominated in Japanese yen.

23

 

Our business is dependent on the continued supply of battery cells for our vehicles?battery packs as well as for the battery packs we produce for other automobile manufacturers. While we believe several sources of the battery cells are available for such battery packs, we have fully qualified only one supplier for the cells used in such battery packs and have very limited flexibility in changing cell suppliers. Any disruption in the supply of battery cells from such vendors could disrupt production of our vehicles and of the battery packs we produce for other automobile manufacturers until such time as a different supplier is fully qualified. Furthermore, fluctuations or shortages in petroleum and other economic conditions may cause us to experience significant increases in freight charges and raw material costs. Substantial increases in the prices for our raw materials or prices charged to us, such as those charged by our battery cell manufacturers, would increase our operating costs, and could reduce our margins if we cannot recoup the increased costs through increased electric vehicle prices. There can be no assurance that we will be able to recoup increasing costs of raw materials by increasing vehicle prices. Any attempts to increase vehicle prices in response to increased raw material costs could be viewed negatively by our customers, result in cancellations of vehicle orders and reservations and could materially and adversely affect our brand, image, business, prospects and operating results.

Our success could be harmed by negative publicity regarding our company or our products, particularly Model S.

Occasionally, third parties evaluate or publish stories regarding our vehicles. For example, in 2013 the New York Times published a negative review of the Model S and our Supercharger network on a route from Washington, D.C. to Boston. The story created a negative public perception about Model S, its capabilities and the Supercharger network. To the extent that negative comments about us or our products are believed by the public, this may cause current or potential customers not to purchase our electric vehicles, including Model S and Model X, which can materially and adversely affect our business, operating results, financial conditions and prospects.

Our distribution model is different from the predominant current distribution model for automobile manufacturers, which makes evaluating our business, operating results and future prospects difficult.

Our distribution model is not common in the automobile industry today, particularly in the United States. We plan to continue to sell our performance electric vehicles in company-owned Tesla stores and over the internet. While we believe our approach is important to the success of our technology and vehicles, this model of vehicle distribution is relatively new and unproven, especially in the United States, and subjects us to substantial risk as it requires, in the aggregate, a significant expenditure and provides for slower expansion of our distribution and sales systems than may be possible by utilizing a more traditional dealer franchise system. For example, we do not utilize long-established sales channels developed through a franchise system to increase our sales volume, which may harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. Moreover, we compete with companies with well-established distribution channels.

We have opened Tesla stores in North America, Europe and the Asia Pacific Region, many of which have been open for only a short period of time. We have relatively limited experience distributing and selling our performance vehicles through our Tesla stores, especially in Asia. Our success will depend in large part on our ability to effectively develop our own sales channels and marketing strategies. Implementing our business model is subject to numerous significant challenges, including obtaining permits and approvals from local and state authorities, and we may not be successful in addressing these challenges. The concept and layout of our interactive stores, which are typically located in high profile retail centers, is different than what has previously been used in automotive sales. We do not know whether our store strategy will continue to be successful. We may incur additional costs in order to improve or change our retail strategy.

Other aspects of our distribution model also differ from those used by traditional automobile manufacturers. For example, we do not anticipate that we will ever carry a significant amount of vehicle inventory at our stores and customers may need to wait up to a few months from the time they place an order until the time they receive their vehicle. This type of custom manufacturing is unusual in the premium sedan market in the United States and it is unproven whether the average customer will be willing to wait this amount of time for such a vehicle. If customers do not embrace this ordering and retail experience, our business will be harmed.

24

 

We may become subject to product liability claims, which could harm our financial condition and liquidity if we are not able to successfully defend or insure against such claims.

We may become subject to product liability claims, which could harm our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. The automobile industry experiences significant product liability claims and we face inherent risk of exposure to claims in the event our vehicles do not perform as expected or malfunction resulting in personal injury or death. Our risks in this area are particularly pronounced given the limited number of vehicles delivered to date and limited field experience of those vehicles. A successful product liability claim against us could require us to pay a substantial monetary award. Moreover, a product liability claim could generate substantial negative publicity about our vehicles and business and inhibit or prevent commercialization of other future vehicle candidates which would have material adverse effect on our brand, business, prospects and operating results. We self-insure against the risk of product liability claims, meaning that any product liability claims will have to be paid from company funds, not by insurance. Any lawsuit seeking significant monetary damages may have a material adverse effect on our reputation, business and financial condition. We may not be able to secure additional product liability insurance coverage on commercially acceptable terms or at reasonable costs when needed, particularly if we do face liability for our products and are forced to make a claim under such a policy.

We are currently expanding and improving our information technology systems. If these implementations are not successful, our business and operations could be disrupted and our operating results could be harmed.

We are currently expanding and improving our information technology systems, including implementing new internally developed systems, to assist us in the management of our business. In particular, our volume production of Model S necessitates continued development, maintenance and improvement of our information technology systems in the U.S. and abroad, which include product data management, procurement, inventory management, production planning and execution, sales, service and logistics, dealer management, financial, tax and regulatory compliance systems. These systems support our operations and enable us to produce Model S and future vehicles like Model X in volume. The implementation, maintenance and improvement of these systems require significant management time, support and cost. Moreover, there are inherent risks associated with developing, improving and expanding our core systems as well as implementing new systems, including the disruption of our data management, procurement, manufacturing execution, finance, supply chain and sales and service processes. These risks may affect our ability to manage our data and inventory, procure parts or supplies or manufacture, sell, deliver and service vehicles, or achieve and maintain compliance with, or realize available benefits under, tax laws and other applicable regulations.

We cannot be sure that these expanded systems or their required functionality will be effectively implemented or sufficiently maintained. If we do not successfully implement, improve or maintain these systems, our operations may be disrupted, our ability to accurately and/or timely report our financial results could be impaired; and deficiencies may arise in our internal control over financial reporting, which may impact our ability to certify our financial results. If these systems or their functionality do not operate as we expect them to, we may be required to expend significant resources to make corrections or find alternative sources for performing these functions.

We may not realize the benefits of our Supercharger network, which could harm our business, brand and operating results.

We continue to deploy Tesla Superchargers in the United States, Europe and Asia. Tesla Superchargers are a network of charging stations designed to provide fast-charge capability to owners of Model S vehicles with the Supercharging option. We intend to expand the Tesla Supercharger network throughout the U.S., Canada, Europe and Asia, but we may be unable to do so due to a number of factors, including the inability to secure, or delays in securing, suitable locations and permits, problems negotiating leases with landowners or obtaining required permits for such locations, difficulties in interfacing with the infrastructures of various utility companies and greater than expected costs and difficulties of installing, maintaining and operating the network.

We may also be unable to expand the Supercharger network as fast as we intend or as the public expects, or to place the charging stations in places our customers believe to be optimal. Furthermore, even where Superchargers exist, the increasing number of Model S vehicles as well as future vehicles such as Model X may oversaturate the available charging bays at such Superchargers, leading to increased wait times and dissatisfaction for customers. In addition, as we have announced that we will not be charging our customers to access this network in addition to what they have already paid for their vehicles, any significant unexpected costs that we encounter will entirely be borne by us and may harm our operating results. Although our Supercharger network is intended to address customer concerns regarding long-distance travel, this network may not result in increased reservations or sales of Model S or future vehicles like Model X. If our Supercharger network is not expanded as currently planned or as quickly as planned, we may not realize the benefits of our Supercharger network and our business and operating results could be materially affected.

25

 

If we are unable to design, develop, market and sell new electric vehicles that address additional market opportunities, our business, prospects and operating results will suffer.

We may not be able to successfully develop new electric vehicles, address new market segments or develop a significantly broader customer base. In 2012, we publicly revealed an early prototype of the Model X crossover as the first vehicle we intend to develop by leveraging the Model S platform and are currently testing our Beta Model X vehicles. We have also announced our intent to develop Model 3 based on a smaller platform than the Model S which we expect to produce at the Tesla Factory after the introduction of Model X. Model 3 is currently planned to be a lower cost, smaller sedan designed for the mass market. Therefore, we intend to manufacture Model 3 in significantly higher volumes than Model S and there can be no assurance we can successfully scale our business accordingly. In addition, we have not yet finalized the design, engineering or component sourcing plans for Model 3 and there are no assurances that we will be able to bring this vehicle to market at the price point and in the volume that we currently intend, if at all. The market for vehicles in the price range we expect for Model 3 is much more competitive than for Model S and Model X, and therefore margins are likely to be lower compared to Model S and Model X margins. Our efforts to manufacture and sell a sufficiently profitable Model 3 may not be as successful, and therefore our business, prospects and operating results may suffer. Our failure to address additional market opportunities would harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

The automotive market is highly competitive, and we may not be successful in competing in this industry. We currently face competition from new and established competitors and expect to face competition from others in the future.

The worldwide automotive market, particularly for alternative fuel vehicles, is highly competitive today and we expect it will become even more so in the future. Other automobile manufacturers entered the electric vehicle market at the end of 2010 and we expect additional competitors to enter this market. With respect to Model S, we face competition from existing and future automobile manufacturers in the extremely competitive premium sedan market, including Audi, BMW, Lexus and Mercedes.

Many established and new automobile manufacturers have entered or have announced plans to enter the alternative fuel vehicle market. BMW, Daimler, Nissan, Fiat, Ford and Mitsubishi, among others, have electric vehicles available today. Moreover, Porsche, Lexus, Audi, Volkswagen and Volvo are also developing electric vehicles. In addition, several manufacturers, including General Motors, Toyota, Ford, and Honda, are each selling hybrid vehicles, and certain of these manufacturers have announced plug-in versions of their hybrid vehicles. For example, in December 2010, General Motors introduced the Chevrolet Volt, which is a plug-in hybrid vehicle that operates purely on electric power for a limited number of miles, at which time an internal combustion engine engages to recharge the battery pack.

Moreover, it has been reported that many of the other large OEMs, such as Daimler, Lexus and Audi, are also developing electric vehicles. Several new start-ups have also entered or announced plans to enter the market for performance electric vehicles. Finally, electric vehicles have already been brought to market in China and other foreign countries and we expect a number of those manufacturers to enter the United States market as well.

Most of our current and potential competitors have significantly greater financial, technical, manufacturing, marketing and other resources than we do and may be able to devote greater resources to the design, development, manufacturing, distribution, promotion, sale and support of their products. Virtually all of our competitors have more extensive customer bases and broader customer and industry relationships than we do. In addition, almost all of these companies have longer operating histories and greater name recognition than we do. Our competitors may be in a stronger position to respond quickly to new technologies and may be able to design, develop, market and sell their products more effectively. Additionally, we have not in the past, and do not currently, offer customary discounts on our vehicles like most of our competitors do.

We expect competition in our industry to intensify in the future in light of increased demand for alternative fuel vehicles, continuing globalization and consolidation in the worldwide automotive industry. Factors affecting competition include product quality and features, innovation and development time, pricing, reliability, safety, fuel economy, customer service and financing terms. Increased competition may lead to lower vehicle unit sales and increased inventory, which may result in a further downward price pressure and adversely affect our business, financial condition, operating results and prospects. Our ability to successfully compete in our industry will be fundamental to our future success in existing and new markets and our market share. There can be no assurances that we will be able to compete successfully in our markets. If our competitors introduce new cars or services that compete with or surpass the quality, price or performance of our cars or services, we may be unable to satisfy existing customers or attract new customers at the prices and levels that would allow us to generate attractive rates of return on our investment. Increased competition could result in price reductions and revenue shortfalls, loss of customers and loss of market share, which could harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

26

 

Demand in the automobile industry is volatile, which may lead to lower vehicle unit sales and adversely affect our operating results.

Volatility of demand in the automobile industry may materially and adversely affect our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. The markets in which we currently compete and plan to compete in the future have been subject to considerable volatility in demand in recent periods.   Demand for automobile sales depends to a large extent on general, economic, political and social conditions in a given market and the introduction of new vehicles and technologies. As a low volume producer, we have less financial resources than more established automobile manufacturers to withstand changes in the market and disruptions in demand. As our business grows, economic conditions and trends in other countries and regions where we currently or will sell our electric vehicles, such as Europe and Asia, will impact our business, prospects and operating results as well. Demand for our electric vehicles may also be affected by factors directly impacting automobile price or the cost of purchasing and operating automobiles, such as sales and financing incentives, prices of raw materials and parts and components, cost of fuel and governmental regulations, including tariffs, import regulation and other taxes. Volatility in demand may lead to lower vehicle unit sales and increased inventory, which may result in further downward price pressure and adversely affect our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. These effects may have a more pronounced impact on our business given our relatively smaller scale and financial resources as compared to many incumbent automobile manufacturers.

If we are unable to establish and maintain confidence in our long-term business prospects among consumers, analysts and within our industry, then our financial condition, operating results, business prospects and stock price may suffer materially.

Our vehicles are highly technical products that require maintenance and support. If we were to cease or cut back operations, even years from now, buyers of our vehicles from years earlier might have much more difficulty in maintaining their vehicles and obtaining satisfactory support. As a result, consumers may be less likely to purchase our vehicles now if they are not convinced that our business will succeed or that our operations will continue for many years. Similarly, suppliers and other third parties will be less likely to invest time and resources in developing business relationships with us if they are not convinced that our business will succeed. If we are required to curtail our expansion plans in the future as we have done in the past, this may result in negative perceptions regarding our long-term business prospects and may lead to cancellations of Model S or Model X orders and reservations.

Accordingly, in order to build and maintain our business, we must maintain confidence among customers, suppliers, analysts and other parties in our liquidity and long-term business prospects. In contrast to some more established automakers, we believe that, in our case, the task of maintaining such confidence may be particularly complicated by factors such as the following:

?

our limited operating history;

?

unfamiliarity with or uncertainty about Model X and future Tesla vehicles;

?

uncertainty about the long-term marketplace acceptance of alternative fuel vehicles generally, or electric vehicles specifically;

?

the perceived prospect that we will need ongoing infusions of external capital to fund our planned operations;

?

the size of our expansion plans in comparison to our existing capital base and scope and history of operations; and

?

the prospect or actual emergence of direct, sustained competitive pressure from more established automakers, which may be more likely if our initial efforts are perceived to be commercially successful.

Many of these factors are largely outside our control, and any negative perceptions about our long-term business prospects, even if exaggerated or unfounded, would likely harm our business and make it more difficult to raise additional funds when needed.

We have limited experience servicing our vehicles, especially in certain regions outside of the United States, and we are using a different service model from the one typically used in the industry. If we are unable to address the service requirements of our existing and future customers, our business will be materially and adversely affected.

If we are unable to successfully address the service requirements of our existing and future customers and meet customer expectations regarding service, our business and prospects will be materially and adversely affected. We have limited experience servicing our vehicles, especially in Europe and Asia. Servicing electric vehicles is different than servicing vehicles with internal combustion engines and requires specialized skills, including high voltage training and servicing techniques. If we are unable to satisfactorily service our customers and the various service related issues that they are facing and may face in the future, our ability to generate customer loyalty, grow our business and sell additional vehicles could be impaired.

27

 

We service our performance electric vehicles through our company-owned Tesla service centers, certain of our stores, and through our mobile service technicians known as the Tesla Rangers. However, certain service centers have been open for short periods, such as those outside of the United States, and to date we have only limited experience servicing our performance vehicles at these locations. We will need to open new standalone service centers in locations around the world and hire and train significant numbers of new employees to staff these service centers and act as Tesla Rangers in order to successfully maintain our fleet of delivered performance electric vehicles. We only implemented our Tesla Rangers program in October 2009 and have limited experience in deploying them to service our customers?vehicles. There can be no assurance that these service arrangements or our limited experience servicing our vehicles will adequately address the service requirements of our customers to their satisfaction, or that we will have sufficient resources to meet these service requirements in a timely manner as the volume of vehicles we are able to deliver annually increases.

We do not expect to be able to open Tesla service centers in all the geographic areas in which our existing and potential customers may reside. In order to address the service needs of customers who are not in geographical proximity to our service centers, we plan to either transport those vehicles to the nearest Tesla store or service center for servicing or deploy our mobile Tesla Rangers to service the vehicles at the customer抯 location. These special arrangements may be expensive and we may not be able to recoup the costs of providing these services to our customers. In addition, a number of potential customers may choose not to purchase our vehicles because of the lack of a more widespread service network. If we do not adequately address our customers?service needs, our brand and reputation will be adversely affected, which in turn, could have a material and adverse impact on our business, financial condition, operating results and prospects.

Traditional automobile manufacturers in the United States do not provide maintenance and repair services directly. Consumers must rather service their vehicles through franchised dealerships or through third party maintenance service providers. We do not have any such arrangements with third party service providers and it is unclear when or even whether such third party service providers will be able to acquire the expertise to service our vehicles. At this point, we anticipate that we will be providing substantially all of the service for our vehicles for the foreseeable future. As our vehicles are placed in more locations, we may encounter negative reactions from our consumers who are frustrated that they cannot use local service stations to the same extent as they have with their conventional automobiles and this frustration may result in negative publicity and reduced sales, thereby harming our business and prospects.

In addition, the motor vehicle industry laws in many states require that service facilities be available with respect to vehicles physically sold from locations in the state. Whether these laws would also require that service facilities be available with respect to vehicles sold over the internet to consumers in a state in which we have no physical presence is uncertain. While we believe our Tesla Ranger program and our practice of transporting customers?vehicles to our nearest Tesla service center would satisfy regulators in these circumstances, without seeking formal regulatory guidance, there are no assurances that regulators will not attempt to require that we provide physical service facilities in their states. Further, certain state franchise laws which prohibit manufacturers from being licensed as a dealer or acting in the capacity of dealer also restrict manufacturers from providing vehicle service. If issues arise in connection with these laws, certain aspects of Tesla抯 service program would need to be restructured to comply with state law, which may harm our business.

We may not succeed in maintaining and strengthening the Tesla brand, which would materially and adversely affect customer acceptance of our vehicles and components and our business, revenues and prospects.

Our business and prospects are heavily dependent on our ability to develop, maintain and strengthen the Tesla brand. Any failure to develop, maintain and strengthen our brand may materially and adversely affect our ability to sell the Model S, Model X, Model 3 and other future planned electric vehicles, and sell our electric powertrain components. If we do not continue to establish, maintain and strengthen our brand, we may lose the opportunity to build a critical mass of customers. Promoting and positioning our brand will likely depend significantly on our ability to provide high quality electric cars and maintenance and repair services, and we have very limited experience in these areas. Any problems associated with the Toyota RAV4 EV and Mercedes-Benz B-Class EV, both of which use a Tesla powertrain, or the Model X may hurt the Tesla brand.

In addition, we expect that our ability to develop, maintain and strengthen the Tesla brand will also depend heavily on the success of our marketing efforts. To date, we have limited experience with marketing activities as we have relied primarily on the internet, word of mouth and attendance at industry trade shows to promote our brand. To further promote our brand, we may be required to change our marketing practices, which could result in substantially increased advertising expenses, including the need to use traditional media such as television, radio and print. The automobile industry is intensely competitive, and we may not be successful in building, maintaining and strengthening our brand. Many of our current and potential competitors, particularly automobile manufacturers headquartered in Detroit, Japan and the European Union, have greater name recognition, broader customer relationships and substantially greater marketing resources than we do. If we do not develop and maintain a strong brand, our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results will be materially and adversely impacted.

28

 

If our vehicle owners customize our vehicles or change the charging infrastructure with aftermarket products, the vehicle may not operate properly, which could harm our business.

Automobile enthusiasts may seek to 揾ack?our vehicles to modify its performance which could compromise vehicle safety systems. Also, we are aware of customers who have customized their vehicles with after-market parts that may compromise driver safety. For example, some customers have installed seats that elevate the driver such that airbag and other safety systems could be compromised. Other customers have changed wheels and tires, while others have installed large speaker systems that may impact the electrical systems of the vehicle. We have not tested, nor do we endorse, such changes or products. In addition, customer use of improper external cabling or unsafe charging outlets can expose our customers to injury from high voltage electricity. Such unauthorized modifications could reduce the safety of our vehicles and any injuries resulting from such modifications could result in adverse publicity which would negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Our plan to expand our network of Tesla stores, service centers and Superchargers will require significant cash investments and management resources and may not meet our expectations with respect to additional sales of our electric vehicles. In addition, we may not be able to open stores or service centers in certain states or Superchargers in desired locations.

Our plan to expand our network of Tesla stores, service centers and Superchargers will require significant cash investments and management resources and may not meet our expectations with respect to additional sales of our electric vehicles. This ongoing global expansion may not have the desired effect of increasing sales and expanding our brand presence to the degree we are anticipating. Furthermore, there can be no assurances that we will be able to expand on the budget or timeline we have established. We will also need to ensure we are in compliance with any regulatory requirements applicable to the sale and service of our vehicles in those jurisdictions, which could take considerable time and expense. If we experience any delays in expanding our network of Tesla stores, service centers and Superchargers, this could lead to a decrease in sales of our vehicles and could negatively impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. We have opened Tesla stores and service centers in major metropolitan areas throughout North America, Europe and Asia, and we plan to open additional stores and service centers worldwide to support our ongoing worldwide Model S rollout. We have also rapidly expanded our Supercharger network in the U.S., Europe and China. However, we may not be able to expand at a sufficient rate and our planned expansion will require significant cash investment and management resources, as well as efficiency in the execution of establishing these locations and in hiring and training the necessary employees to effectively sell and service our vehicles.

Furthermore, certain states and foreign jurisdictions may have permit requirements, franchise dealer laws or similar laws or regulations that may preclude or restrict our ability to open stores or sell vehicles out of such states and jurisdictions. Any such prohibition or restriction may lead to decreased sales in such jurisdictions, which could harm our business, prospects and operating results. See Risk Factor 揥e may face regulatory limitations on our ability to sell vehicles directly or over the internet which could materially and adversely affect our ability to sell our electric vehicles.?Additionally, we may face potential difficulties in finding suitable Supercharger sites in desired locations, negotiating leases or obtaining required permits for such locations.

We face risks associated with our international operations and expansion, including unfavorable regulatory, political, tax and labor conditions and establishing ourselves in new markets, all of which could harm our business.

We face various risks associated with our international operations and expansion. We currently have international operations and subsidiaries in various countries and jurisdictions in Europe and Asia that are subject to the legal, political, regulatory and social requirements and economic conditions in these jurisdictions. Additionally, as part of our growth strategy, we will continue to expand our sales, maintenance, repair and Supercharger services internationally, particularly in China. However, we have limited experience to date selling and servicing our vehicles internationally, as well as limited experience installing and operating Superchargers internationally, and international expansion requires us to make significant expenditures, including the establishment of local operating entities, hiring of local employees and establishing facilities in advance of generating any revenue. We are subject to a number of risks associated with international business activities that may increase our costs, impact our ability to sell our electric vehicles and require significant management attention. These risks include:

?

conforming our vehicles to various international regulatory and safety requirements where our vehicles are sold, or homologation;

?

difficulty in establishing, staffing and managing foreign operations;

?

difficulties attracting customers in new jurisdictions;

?

foreign government taxes, regulations and permit requirements, including foreign taxes that we may not be able to offset against taxes imposed upon us in the United States, and foreign tax and other laws limiting our ability to repatriate funds to the United States;

?

fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates, including risks related to any interest rate swap or other hedging activities we undertake;

29

 

?

our ability to enforce our contractual and intellectual property rights, especially in those foreign countries that do not respect and protect intellectual property rights to the same extent as do the United States, Japan and European countries, which increases the risk of unauthorized, and uncompensated, use of our technology;

?

United States and foreign government trade restrictions, customs regulations, tariffs and price or exchange controls;

?

foreign labor laws, regulations and restrictions;

?

preferences of foreign nations for domestically produced vehicles;

?

changes in diplomatic and trade relationships;

?

political instability, natural disasters, war or events of terrorism; and

?

the strength of international economies.

Additionally, as we have expanded into new international markets, we have faced challenges with ensuring that our charging equipment works successfully with the charging infrastructure in such markets. For example, we have encountered such challenges in Norway and China.  If customers experience problems with the way our charging equipment works with the local charging infrastructure, or we are unable to adapt our equipment to resolve such problems, then the viability and acceptance of our vehicles in such markets could be materially and adversely affected.

If we fail to successfully address these risks, our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition could be materially harmed.

Developments in alternative technologies or improvements in the internal combustion engine may materially adversely affect the demand for our electric vehicles.

Significant developments in alternative technologies, such as advanced diesel, ethanol, hydrogen, fuel cells or compressed natural gas, or improvements in the fuel economy of the internal combustion engine, may materially and adversely affect our business and prospects in ways we do not currently anticipate. Any failure by us to develop new or enhanced technologies or processes, or to react to changes in existing technologies, could materially delay our development and introduction of new and enhanced electric vehicles, which could result in the loss of competitiveness of our vehicles, decreased revenue and a loss of market share to competitors.

The unavailability, reduction or elimination of, or uncertainty regarding, government and economic incentives in the U.S. and abroad could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, operating results and prospects.

Any reduction or elimination of government and economic incentives due to policy changes the reduced need for such incentives as the customer base of our electric vehicles expands, fiscal tightening or other reasons may result in the diminished competitiveness of the alternative fuel vehicle industry generally or our electric vehicles in particular. Such reduction or elimination of incentives could materially and adversely affect our growth as well because our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results, as our growth depends, in part, on the availability and amounts of government incentives. For example, we currently benefit from certain exemptions in the United States, such as the California state sales and use taxes. Similarly, government programs in Europe favor the purchase of electric vehicles, including through disincentives that discourage the use of gas-powered vehicles. In Norway, for example, the purchase of electric vehicles is not currently subject to import taxes, taxes on non-recurring vehicle fees, the 25% value added tax or the purchase taxes that apply to the purchase of gas-powered vehicles. If such government programs are reduced or eliminated, or the available benefits thereunder are exhausted earlier than anticipated, sales of all electric vehicles, including our Model S, could be adversely affected. In addition, customers in certain markets may delay taking delivery of their Tesla vehicles if they believe that certain electric vehicle incentives will be available at a later date, which may negatively affect our ability to achieve our planned delivery targets.

Our strategic relationships with third parties, such as Panasonic, are subject to various risks which could adversely affect our business and future prospects.

Our strategic relationships third parties, such as Panasonic which supplies us with battery cells for use in Model S and Model X and is our partner in the Gigafactory, pose various risks to us, including potential loss of access to important technology and vehicle parts, potential loss of business and adverse publicity. In addition, these third parties may not perform as expected under our agreements with them, such as with respect to vehicle parts quality of timeliness, and we may have disagreements or disputes with these third parties. The occurrence of any of the foregoing could adversely affect our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

30

 

The operation of our vehicles is different from internal combustion engine vehicles and our customers may experience difficulty operating them properly, including difficulty transitioning between different methods of braking.

We have designed our vehicles to minimize inconvenience and inadvertent driver damage to the powertrain. In certain instances, these protections may cause the vehicle to behave in ways that are unfamiliar to drivers of internal combustion vehicles. For example, we employ regenerative braking to recharge the battery pack in most modes of vehicle operation. Our customers may become accustomed to using this regenerative braking instead of the wheel brakes to slow the vehicle. However, when the vehicle is at maximum charge, the regenerative braking is not needed and is not employed by the vehicle. Accordingly, our customers may have difficulty shifting between different methods of braking. In addition, we use safety mechanisms to limit motor torque when the powertrain system reaches elevated temperatures. In such instances, the vehicle抯 acceleration and speed will decrease. Finally, if the driver permits the battery pack to substantially deplete its charge, the vehicle will progressively limit motor torque and speed to preserve the charge that remains. The vehicle will lose speed and ultimately coast to a stop. Despite several warnings about an imminent loss of charge, the ultimate loss of speed may be unexpected.

There can be no assurance that our customers will operate the vehicles properly, especially in these situations. Any accidents resulting from such failure to operate our vehicles properly could harm our brand and reputation, result in adverse publicity and product liability claims, and have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. In addition, if consumers dislike these features, they may choose not to buy additional cars from us, which could also harm our business and prospects.

If we are unable to keep up with advances in electric vehicle technology, we may suffer a decline in our competitive position.

We may be unable to keep up with changes in electric vehicle technology and, as a result, may suffer a decline in our competitive position. Any failure to keep up with advances in electric vehicle technology would result in a decline in our competitive position which would materially and adversely affect our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. Our research and development efforts may not be sufficient to adapt to changes in electric vehicle technology. As technologies change, we plan to upgrade or adapt our vehicles and introduce new models in order to continue to provide vehicles with the latest technology, in particular battery cell technology. However, our vehicles may not compete effectively with alternative vehicles if we are not able to source and integrate the latest technology into our vehicles. For example, we do not currently manufacture battery cells, which makes us dependent upon other suppliers of battery cell technology for our battery packs.

If we are unable to attract and/or retain key employees and hire qualified management, technical, vehicle engineering and manufacturing personnel, our ability to compete could be harmed and our stock price may decline.

The loss of the services of any of our key employees could disrupt our operations, delay the development and introduction of our vehicles and services, and negatively impact our business, prospects and operating results as well as cause our stock price to decline. In particular, we are highly dependent on the services of Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer, Product Architect and Chairman of our Board of Directors, and JB Straubel, our Chief Technical Officer. None of our key employees is bound by an employment agreement for any specific term. There can be no assurance that we will be able to successfully attract and retain senior leadership necessary to grow our business. Our future success depends upon our ability to attract and retain our executive officers and other key technology, sales, marketing, engineering, manufacturing and support personnel and any failure to do so could adversely impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. We have in the past and may in the future experience difficulty in retaining members of our senior management team as well as technical, vehicle engineering and manufacturing personnel due to various factors, such as a very competitive labor market for talented individuals with automotive experience. In addition, we do not have 搆ey person?life insurance policies covering any of our officers or other key employees.

Currently in Northern California, there is increasing competition for talented individuals with the specialized knowledge of electric vehicles, software engineers, manufacturing engineers and other skilled employees and this competition affects both our ability to retain key employees and hire new ones. Our continued success depends upon our continued ability to hire new employees in a timely manner and retain current employees. Additionally, we compete with many mature and prosperous companies in Northern California that have far greater financial resources than we do and thus can offer current or perspective employees more lucrative incentive packages than we can. Any difficulties in retaining current employees or recruiting new ones would have an adverse effect on our performance.

We are highly dependent on the services of Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer.

We are highly dependent on the services of Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer, Product Architect, Chairman of our Board of Directors and largest stockholder. Although Mr. Musk spends significant time with Tesla and is highly active in our management, he does not devote his full time and attention to Tesla. Mr. Musk also currently serves as Chief Executive Officer and Chief Technical Officer of Space Exploration Technologies, a developer and manufacturer of space launch vehicles, and Chairman of SolarCity, a solar equipment installation company.

31

 

We are subject to various environmental and safety laws and regulations that could impose substantial costs upon us and negatively impact our ability to operate our manufacturing facilities.

As an automobile manufacturer, we are subject to national, state, provincial and/or local environmental, health and safety laws and regulations, including laws relating to the use, handling, storage, disposal and human exposure to hazardous materials, both in the United States and abroad. Environmental and health and safety laws and regulations can be complex, and we expect that our business and operations will be affected by new, or future amendments to, such laws that may require us to change our operations, potentially resulting in a material adverse effect on our business. These laws can give rise to liability for administrative oversight costs, cleanup costs, property damage, bodily injury and associated fines and penalties. Capital and operating expenses needed to comply with environmental, health and safety laws and regulations can be significant, and violations of those laws may result in substantial fines and penalties, third party damages, suspension of production or a cessation of our operations. These expenses could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition or operating results.

Contamination at properties formerly owned or operated by us, as well as at properties we will own and operate, and properties to which hazardous substances were sent by us, may result in liability for us under environmental laws and regulations, including, but not limited to the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA).  The government can impose liability on us under CERCLA for the full amount of remediation-related costs of a contaminated site without regard to fault.  Such costs can include those associated with the investigation and cleanup of contaminated soil, ground water and buildings as well as to reverse impacts to human health and damages to natural resources.

We may also face unexpected delays in obtaining the necessary permits and approvals required by environmental laws in connection with our manufacturing facilities that could require significant time and financial resources and negatively impact our ability to operate these facilities, which would adversely impact our business prospects and operating results. As the owner of the Tesla Factory and surrounding land, we may be responsible under federal and state laws and regulations for the entire investigation and remediation of any environmental contamination at the Tesla Factory, whether it occurred before or after the date we purchased the property. When Tesla purchased the property, the previous owner and operator of the Tesla Factory, New United Motor Manufacturing, Inc. (NUMMI), identified environmental conditions at the Tesla Factory that could adversely affect soil and groundwater, and agreed to remediate these conditions. Although NUMMI stated that it fully documented and managed all environmental issues at the Tesla Factory, we cannot determine with certainty the truth of this statement, nor the total costs to remediate any pre-existing contamination that may eventually be found.  We have reached an agreement with NUMMI under which, over a ten year period, we will pay the first $15.0 million of any costs of any governmentally-required remediation activities for contamination that existed prior to the closing of the purchase for any known or unknown environmental conditions (Remediation Activities), and NUMMI has agreed to pay the next $15.0 million for such Remediation Activities. Our agreement provides, in part, that NUMMI will pay up to the first $15.0 million on our behalf if such expenses are incurred in the first four years of our agreement, subject to our reimbursement of such costs on the fourth anniversary date of the closing.

On either the ten-year anniversary of the closing or whenever $30.0 million has been spent on Remediation Activities, whichever comes first, NUMMI抯 liability to us with respect to Remediation Activities ceases, and we are responsible for any and all environmental conditions at the Fremont site. At that point in time, we have agreed to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless NUMMI from all liability, including attorney fees, or any costs or penalties it may incur arising out of or in connection with any claim relating to environmental conditions and we have released NUMMI for any known or unknown claims except for NUMMI抯 obligations for representations and warranties under the agreement.

There are no assurances that NUMMI will perform its obligations under our agreement and NUMMI抯 failure to perform would require us to undertake these obligations at a potentially significant cost.  Such performance may also adversely affect the production capacity of, and our ability to operate, the Tesla Factory. Any Remediation Activities or other environmental conditions at the Fremont site could harm our operations and the future use and value of the Fremont site and could delay our production plans for Model S.

Our business may be adversely affected by union activities.

Although none of our employees are currently represented by a labor union, it is common throughout the automobile industry generally for many employees at automobile companies to belong to a union, which can result in higher employee costs and increased risk of work stoppages. Our employees may join or seek recognition to form a labor union, or we may be required to become a union signatory. Our automobile production facility in Fremont, California was purchased from NUMMI. Prior employees of NUMMI were union members and our future work force at this facility may be inclined to vote in favor of forming a labor union. We also own and operate another component manufacturing facility in Lathrop, California.  Furthermore, we are directly or indirectly dependent upon companies with unionized work forces, such as parts suppliers and trucking and freight companies, and work stoppages or strikes organized by such unions could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition or operating results. If a work stoppage occurs, it could delay the manufacture and sale of our performance electric vehicles and have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, operating results or financial condition. The mere fact that our labor force could be unionized may harm our reputation in the eyes of some investors and thereby negatively affect our stock price. Consequently, the unionization of our labor force could negatively impact the company抯 health.

32

 

We are subject to substantial regulation, which is evolving, and unfavorable changes or failure by us to comply with these regulations could substantially harm our business and operating results.

The production and sale of motor vehicles, in general and specifically related to electric vehicles, are subject to substantial regulation under international, federal, state, and local laws. We have incurred, and expect to continue to incur, significant costs in complying with these regulations.

Regulations related to the electric vehicle industry and alternative energy are currently evolving and we face risks associated with changes to these regulations. In the United States, the following are examples of regulatory and statutory issues facing us:

?

the imposition of a carbon tax or the introduction of a cap-and-trade system on electric utilities could increase the cost of electricity;

?

increasingly stringent Clean Air Act emission regulations affecting power plants used to generate electricity could increase the cost of electricity;

?

changes to the regulations governing the assembly and transportation of lithium-ion battery packs, such as the UN Recommendations of the Safe Transport of Dangerous Goods Model Regulations or regulations adopted by the U.S. Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA) could increase the cost of lithium-ion battery packs or restrict their transport;

?

the amendment or rescission of the federal law and regulations mandating increased fuel economy in the United States, referred to as the Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards, could reduce new business opportunities for our powertrain sales and development activities;

?

the amendment or rescission of federal greenhouse gas tailpipe emission regulations administered by EPA under the authority of the Clean Air Act could reduce new business opportunities for our powertrain sales and development activities;

?

the amendment or rescission of California抯 zero emission vehicle  (ZEV) regulations administered by the California Air Resources Board under the California Health & Safety Code could reduce new business opportunities for our powertrain sales and development activities, as well as our ability to monetize ZEV credits not only in California, but also in the eleven additional states that have adopted the California program;

?

increased sensitivity by regulators to the needs of established automobile manufacturers with large employment bases, high fixed costs and business models based on the internal combustion engine could lead them to pass regulations that could reduce the compliance costs of such established manufacturers or mitigate the effects of government efforts to promote alternative fuel vehicles;

?

changes to the vehicle-specific Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, which govern how all motor vehicles are made within the United States, could result in costly changes to how current vehicles are produced; and

?

changes to regulations governing the export of our products could increase our delivery costs to outside the United States or force us to charge consumers in such jurisdictions a higher price for our vehicles.

In addition, as the automotive industry moves towards greater use of electronics in vehicle systems, NHTSA and other regulatory bodies may regulate these electronic systems more stringently, particularly as concerns about distracted driving increase. Such concerns could affect use of electronic systems in Model S, such as the 17 inch display screen, which could reduce the appeal of Model S or require adjustments to the display screen抯 functionality.

As we are currently delivering vehicles in Europe and Asia, we are subject to laws and regulations applicable to the import, sale and service of automobiles in those regions. For example, we are required to meet vehicle-specific safety standards that are often materially different from U.S. requirements, thus resulting in additional investment into the vehicles and systems to ensure regulatory compliance. Unlike in the U.S. where we self-certify our vehicles?compliance with standards, we must obtain advanced approval from regulatory agencies regarding the proper certification or homologation of our vehicles to enter into these markets. This process necessitates that foreign regulatory officials review and certify our vehicles prior to market entry. In addition, we must comply with regulations applicable to vehicles after they enter the market, including foreign reporting requirements and recall management systems.

To the extent U.S. or international laws change, some or all of our vehicles may not comply with any new applicable international, federal, state or local laws, which would have an adverse effect on our business. Compliance with changing regulations could be burdensome, time consuming, and expensive. To the extent compliance with new regulations is cost prohibitive, our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results will be adversely affected.

33

 

We retain certain personal information about our customers and may be subject to various privacy and consumer protection laws.

Our collection, use, retention, security and transfer of personal information of our customers is subject to federal, state, and international laws. These laws continue to be enacted and may be inconsistent from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Complying with changing international laws may cause us to incur substantial costs, expose us to legal liability or require us to change our business practices. Our privacy policy is posted on our website, and any failure by us or our vendor or other business partners to comply with it or with federal, state or international privacy, data protection or security laws or regulations could result in regulatory or litigation-related actions against us, legal liability, fines, damages and other costs. Although we take steps to protect the security of our customers?personal information, we may be required to expend significant resources to comply with data breach requirements if third parties improperly obtain and use the personal information of our customers or we otherwise experience a data loss with respect to customers?personal information. A major breach of our network security and systems could have serious negative consequences for our businesses and future prospects, including possible fines, penalties and damages, reduced customer demand for our vehicles, and harm to our reputation and brand.

We may be compelled to undertake product recalls or take other actions, which could adversely affect our brand image and financial performance.

Any product recall in the future may result in adverse publicity, damage our brand and adversely affect our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. We previously experienced product recalls in May 2009, October 2010 and June 2013, none of which was related to our electric powertrain. In April 2009, we determined that a condition caused by insufficient torqueing of the rear inner hub flange bolt existed in some of our Tesla Roadsters, as a result of a missed process during the manufacture of the Tesla Roadster glider. In October 2010, we initiated a product recall after the 12 volt, low voltage auxiliary cable in a single vehicle chafed against the edge of a carbon fiber panel in the vehicle causing a short, smoke and possible fire behind the right front headlamp of the vehicle. In June 2013, we initiated a recall of slightly more than one thousand Model S vehicles to inspect and repair rear seat strikers that may have been compromised during the assembly process. Rear seat strikers are used to retain the rear seat backs in an upright position. Failure of this component may have resulted in collapse of the rear seat back during a crash. Finally, in January 2014, we implemented a firmware update to address issues with certain Universal Mobile Connector NEMA 14-50 adapters, which are part of the charging units and are not part of the vehicles themselves, potentially overheating during charging. In the future, we may at various times, voluntarily or involuntarily, initiate a recall if any of our vehicles, including Model S, or our electric powertrain components prove to be defective or noncompliant with applicable federal motor vehicle safety standards. Such recalls, voluntary or involuntary, involve significant expense and diversion of management attention and other resources, and could adversely affect our brand image in our target markets, as well as our business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations.

Our current and future warranty reserves may be insufficient to cover future warranty claims which could adversely affect our financial performance.

If our warranty reserves are inadequate to cover future warranty claims on our vehicles, our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results could be materially and adversely affected. Warranty reserves include management抯 best estimate of the projected costs to repair or to replace items under warranty. These estimates are based on actual claims incurred to-date and an estimate of the nature, frequency and costs of future claims. These estimates are inherently uncertain and changes to our historical or projected experience may cause material changes to our warranty reserves in the future. Subject to separate limited warranties for the supplemental restraint system and battery, we provide a four year or 50,000 mile New Vehicle Limited Warranty for the purchasers of Model S. The New Vehicle Limited Warranty for Model S also covers the drive unit for eight years and the battery for a period of eight years or 125,000 miles or unlimited miles, depending on the size of the vehicle抯 battery; although the battery抯 charging capacity is not covered under the New Vehicle Limited Warranty or any Extended Service plan.

In addition, customers have the opportunity to purchase an Extended Service plan for the period after the end of the New Vehicle Limited Warranty for Model S to cover additional services for an additional four years or 50,000 miles, provided it is purchased within a specified period of time. The New Vehicle Limited Warranty and Extended Service plans for the Tesla Roadster and Model S are subject to certain limitations, exclusions or separate warranties, including certain wear items, such as tires, brake pads, paint and general appearance, and battery performance, and is intended to cover parts and labor to repair defects in material or workmanship in the vehicle including the body, chassis, suspension, interior, electronic systems, powertrain and brake system. We have previously provided our Tesla Roadster customers with a battery replacement option to replace the battery in their vehicles at any time after the expiration of the New Vehicle Limited Warranty but before the tenth anniversary of the purchase date of their vehicles. Additionally, in 2013, as part of our ongoing efforts to improve the customer ownership experience, we expanded the battery pack warranty and also eliminated the annual service requirement that was needed to keep the New Vehicle Limited Warranty in effect. Should this change in warranty coverage lead to an increase in warranty claims, we may need to record additional warranty reserves which would negatively affect our profitability.

34

 

Our insurance strategy may not be adequate to protect us from all business risks.

We may be subject, in the ordinary course of business, to losses resulting from products liability, accidents, acts of God and other claims against us, for which we may have no insurance coverage. While we currently maintain general liability, automobile, property, workers?compensation, and directors?and officers?insurance policies, as a general matter, we do not maintain as much insurance coverage as many other companies do, and in some cases, we do not maintain any at all. Additionally, the policies that we do have may include significant deductibles, and we cannot be certain that our insurance coverage will be sufficient to cover all future claims against us. A loss that is uninsured or which exceeds policy limits may require us to pay substantial amounts, which could adversely affect our financial condition and operating results.

Our financial results may vary significantly from period-to-period due fluctuations in our operating costs and the seasonality of our business.

We expect our period-to-period operating results to vary based on our operating costs which we anticipate will increase significantly in future periods as we, among other things, design, develop and manufacture Model X and future products, increase the production capacity at our manufacturing facilities to produce vehicles at higher volumes, develop the Gigafactory, open new Tesla service centers with maintenance and repair capabilities, open new Supercharger locations, increase our sales and marketing activities, and increase our general and administrative functions to support our growing operations. As a result of these factors, we believe that quarter-to-quarter comparisons of our operating results, especially in the short-term, are not necessarily meaningful and that these comparisons cannot be relied upon as indicators of future performance. Moreover, our operating results may not meet expectations of equity research analysts or investors. If any of this occurs, the trading price of our common stock could fall substantially, either suddenly or over time.

Additionally, sales of new cars in the automobile industry typically decline over the winter season and are generally higher during the spring and summer months. We anticipate that our sales of Model S and future models may have similar seasonality, but our limited operating history makes it difficult for us to judge the exact nature or extent of the seasonality of our business. Our operating results could also suffer if we do not achieve revenue consistent with our expectations for this seasonal demand because many of our expenses are based on anticipated levels of annual revenue.

Unauthorized control or manipulation of our vehicles?systems may cause them to operate improperly or not at all, or compromise their safety and data security, which could result in loss of confidence in us and our vehicles and harm our business.

There have been reports of vehicles of other automobile manufacturers being 揾acked?to grant access and operation of the vehicles to unauthorized persons and would-be thieves. Our vehicles, and in particular Model S, are technologically advanced machines requiring the interoperation of numerous complex and evolving hardware and software systems. Subject to our customers?ability to opt out pursuant to our privacy policy, Model S is designed with built-in data connectivity to accept and install periodic remote updates from us to improve or update the functionality of these systems. Although we have designed, implemented and tested security measures to prevent unauthorized access to our vehicles and their systems, our information technology networks and communications with our vehicles may be vulnerable to interception, manipulation, damage, disruptions or shutdowns due to attacks by hackers or breaches due to errors by personnel who have access to our networks and systems. Any such attacks or breaches could result in unexpected control of or changes to our vehicles?functionality, user interface and performance characteristics. Hackers may also use similar means to gain access to data stored in or generated by the vehicle, such as its current geographical position, previous and stored destination address history and web browser 揻avorites.?Any such unauthorized control of vehicles or access to or loss of information could result in legal claims or proceedings and negative publicity, which would negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

The range and power of our electric vehicles on a single charge declines over time, and this may negatively influence potential customers?decisions whether to purchase our vehicles.

The range and power of our electric vehicles on a single charge declines principally as a function of usage, time and charging patterns as well as other factors. How a customer uses their Tesla vehicle, the frequency of recharging the battery pack at a low state of charge and the means of charging can result in additional deterioration of the battery pack抯 ability to hold a charge over the long term. For example, we currently expect that our battery pack for the Tesla Roadster will retain approximately 70% of its ability to hold its initial charge after approximately 100,000 miles or seven years, which will result in a decrease to the vehicle抯 initial range and power. Preliminary internal testing and customer results of Model S to date suggest that deterioration of the Model S battery pack to be less than the Roadster, however, such battery pack deterioration and the related decrease in range and power over time as well as any perceived deterioration or fluctuation in range may negatively influence potential customer decisions whether to purchase our vehicles, which may harm our ability to market and sell our vehicles.

35

 

We may need or want to raise additional funds and these funds may not be available to us when we need them. If we cannot raise additional funds when we need or want them, our operations and prospects could be negatively affected.

The design, manufacture, sale and servicing of automobiles is a capital intensive business. We expect that our principal sources of liquidity will provide us adequate liquidity based on our current plans. However, until we are consistently generating positive free cash flows, if the costs for developing and manufacturing Model X exceed our expectations or if we incur any significant unplanned expenses or embark on or accelerate new significant strategic investments, such as the Gigafactory, we may need to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity, equity-related or debt securities or through obtaining credit from government or financial institutions. This capital will be necessary to fund our ongoing operations, continue research and development projects, including those for our planned Model X crossover and Model 3 vehicle, establish sales and service centers, build and deploy Superchargers and to make the investments in tooling and manufacturing capital required to introduce Model X. We cannot be certain that additional funds will be available to us on favorable terms when required, or at all. If we cannot raise additional funds when we need them, our financial condition, results of operations, business and prospects could be materially adversely affected.

If we fail to effectively manage the residual, financing and credit risks for our recently launched Model S leasing program, our business may suffer.

We recently introduced a leasing program in the United States and Canada through our captive finance company, Tesla Finance. The profitability of the leasing program depends on our ability to accurately project residual values, secure adequate financing and/or business partners to fund and grow this program, and manage customer credit risk. If actual residual values of Model S vehicles are below our estimates, we may suffer lower profitability or potentially have losses. If we are unable to adequately fund our leasing program with either internal funds or external financing sources, we may be unable to grow our sales. Additionally, if we do not properly screen customers for ability to pay their leases on time, we may be exposed to excessive credit risks and associated losses. Furthermore, if our leasing business grows substantially, our business may suffer if we cannot effectively manage the greater levels of residual and credit risks resulting from growth. Finally, if we do not successfully monitor and comply with federal and state financial regulations and consumer protection laws governing lease transactions, we may become subject to enforcement actions or penalties, either of which may harm our business.

Any failure to execute on the Daimler B-Class EV program could hurt our reputation as well as our profitability on this program.

We have worked with Daimler to develop a full electric powertrain for a Daimler Mercedes-Benz B-Class EV vehicle. We have substantially completed our development services under this B-Class program and commenced production of electric powertrains and battery packs for Daimler. The supply agreement for these products contemplates customary obligations of us such as timely deliveries, warranty and product defect obligations. If we fail to meet these obligations, or if we exceed our current cost projections for producing these products, our profitability on this program will suffer and this could have a negative impact on our operating results.

We may face regulatory limitations on our ability to sell vehicles directly or over the internet which could materially and adversely affect our ability to sell our electric vehicles.

We sell our vehicles from our Tesla stores as well as over the internet. We may not be able to sell our vehicles through this sales model in each state in the United States as many states have laws that may be interpreted to prohibit internet sales by manufacturers to residents of the state or to impose other limitations on this sales model, including laws that prohibit manufacturers from selling vehicles directly to consumers without the use of an independent dealership or without a physical presence in the state. In certain states in which we are not able to obtain dealer licenses, we have worked with state regulators to open galleries, which are locations where potential customers can view our vehicles but are not full retail locations. It is possible that a state regulator could later determine that the activities at our gallery constitute unlicensed sales of motor vehicles.

In many states, the application of state motor vehicle laws to our specific sales model is largely untested under state motor vehicle industry laws and is being determined by a fact specific analysis of numerous factors, including whether we have a physical presence or employees in the applicable state, whether we advertise or conduct other activities in the applicable state, how the sale transaction is structured, the volume of sales into the state, and whether the state in question prohibits manufacturers from acting as dealers. As a result of the fact specific and largely untested nature of these issues, and the fact that applying these laws intended for the traditional automobile distribution model to our sales model allows for some interpretation and discretion by the regulators, the manner in which the applicable authorities are applying their state laws to our distribution model continues to be difficult to predict. Laws in some states have limited our ability to obtain dealer licenses from state motor vehicle regulators and may continue to do so.

36

 

In addition, decisions by regulators permitting us to sell vehicles may be subject to challenges as to whether such decisions comply with applicable state motor vehicle industry laws. For example, vehicle dealer associations in New York, Ohio and Massachusetts have filed lawsuits to revoke dealer licenses issued to us. These lawsuits have been dismissed, and in one recent court decision, the Supreme Court of Massachusetts held that state franchise laws like the one in Massachusetts do not restrict a manufacturer, like Tesla, that does not use franchised dealers from selling its vehicles directly to consumers. Such results have reinforced our continuing belief that state laws were not designed to prevent our distribution model. Similar lawsuits have been filed in Georgia and Missouri. Possible additional challenges in other states, if successful, could restrict or prohibit our ability to sell our vehicles to residents in such states. In some states, there have also been regulatory and legislative efforts by vehicle dealer associations to propose bills and regulations that, if enacted, would prevent us from obtaining dealer licenses in their states given our current sales model. Such events recently occurred in New Jersey, where the Motor Vehicle Commission, at the behest of the local automobile dealer lobby, passed a new regulation which purported to invalidate our sales licenses in the state, and in Michigan, where the state抯 automobile dealer association managed to add language into an unrelated bill that had the effect of impairing our right to sell vehicles through Tesla stores in Michigan. We have brought a lawsuit in New Jersey to invalidate that regulation, which we believe to be unlawful, and we are evaluating legislative and litigation solutions to remedy the situation in Michigan. Other states, such as New York, Ohio and Pennsylvania, have passed legislation that clarifies our ability to operate, but at the same time limits the number of dealer licenses we can obtain or stores that we can operate.

We are also registered as both a motor vehicle manufacturer and dealer in Canada, Australia, and Japan, and have obtained licenses to sell vehicles in other places such as Hong Kong and China. Furthermore, while we have performed an analysis of the principal laws in the European Union relating to our distribution model and believe we comply with such laws, we have not performed a complete analysis in all foreign jurisdictions in which we may sell vehicles. Accordingly, there may be laws in jurisdictions we have not yet entered or laws we are unaware of in jurisdictions we have entered that may restrict our sales or other business practices. Even for those jurisdictions we have analyzed, the laws in this area can be complex, difficult to interpret and may change over time.

We may need to defend ourselves against patent or trademark infringement claims, which may be time-consuming and would cause us to incur substantial costs.

Companies, organizations or individuals, including our competitors, may hold or obtain patents, trademarks or other proprietary rights that would prevent, limit or interfere with our ability to make, use, develop, sell or market our vehicles or components, which could make it more difficult for us to operate our business. From time to time, we may receive communications from holders of patents or trademarks regarding their proprietary rights. Companies holding patents or other intellectual property rights may bring suits alleging infringement of such rights or otherwise assert their rights and urge us to take licenses. In addition, if we are determined to have infringed upon a third party抯 intellectual property rights, we may be required to do one or more of the following:

?

cease selling, incorporating or using vehicles or offering goods or services that incorporate or use the challenged intellectual property;

?

pay substantial damages;

?

obtain a license from the holder of the infringed intellectual property right, which license may not be available on reasonable terms or at all;

?

redesign our vehicles or other goods or services; or

?

establish and maintain alternative branding for our products and services.

In the event of a successful claim of infringement against us and our failure or inability to obtain a license to the infringed technology or other intellectual property right, our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition could be materially adversely affected. In addition, any litigation or claims, whether or not valid, could result in substantial costs and diversion of resources and management attention.

We may also face claims that our use of technology licensed or otherwise obtained from a third party infringes the rights of others. In such cases, we may seek indemnification from our licensors/suppliers under our contracts with them. However, indemnification may be unavailable or insufficient to cover our costs and losses, depending on our use of the technology, whether we choose to retain control over conduct of the litigation, and other factors.

37

 

Our patent applications may not result in issued patents, which may have a material adverse effect on our ability to prevent others from interfering with our commercialization of our products.

The status of patents involves complex legal and factual questions and the breadth and effectiveness of patented claims is uncertain. We cannot be certain that we are the first creator of inventions covered by pending patent applications or the first to file patent applications on these inventions, nor can we be certain that our pending patent applications will result in issued patents or that any of our issued patents will afford sufficient protection against someone creating a knockoff of our products, or as a defense against a competitor who claims that we are infringing its patents. In addition, patent applications filed in foreign countries are subject to laws, rules and procedures that differ from those of the United States, and thus we cannot be certain that foreign patent applications related to issued U.S. patents will result in issued patents in those foreign jurisdictions. In addition, others may obtain patents that we need to license or design around, either of which would increase costs and may adversely affect our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Our trademark applications in certain countries remain subject to outstanding opposition proceedings.

We currently sell and market our products and services in various countries under our Tesla marks. We have filed trademark applications for our Tesla marks and opposition proceedings to trademark applications of third parties in various countries in which we currently sell and plan to sell our products and services. Certain of our trademark applications are subject to outstanding opposition proceedings brought by owners or applicants alleging prior applications for or use of similar marks. If we cannot resolve these oppositions and thereby secure registered rights in these countries, our ability to challenge third party users of the Tesla marks will be reduced and the value of the marks representing our exclusive brand name in these countries will be diluted. In addition, there is a risk that the prior rights owners could in the future take actions to challenge our use of the Tesla marks in these countries. Such actions could have a severe impact on our position in these countries and may inhibit our ability to use the Tesla marks in these countries. If we were prevented from using the Tesla marks in any or all of these countries, we would need to expend significant additional financial and marketing resources on establishing an alternative brand identity in these markets.

Our facilities or operations could be damaged or adversely affected as a result of disasters or unpredictable events.

Our corporate headquarters in Palo Alto, Tesla Factory in Fremont and additional component manufacturing facilities in Lathrop are located in Northern California, a region known for seismic activity. If major disasters such as earthquakes, fires, floods, hurricanes, wars, terrorist attacks, computer viruses, pandemics or other events occur, or our information system or communications network breaks down or operates improperly, our headquarters and production facilities may be seriously damaged, or we may have to stop or delay production and shipment of our products. In addition, our lease for our Palo Alto facility permits the landlord to terminate the lease following a casualty event if the needed repairs are in excess of certain thresholds and we do not agree to pay for any uninsured amounts. We may incur expenses relating to such damages, which could have a material adverse impact on our business, operating results and financial condition.

If our suppliers fail to use ethical business practices and comply with applicable laws and regulations, our brand image could be harmed due to negative publicity.

Our core values, which include developing the highest quality electric vehicles while operating with integrity, are an important component of our brand image, which makes our reputation particularly sensitive to allegations of unethical business practices. We do not control our independent suppliers or their business practices. Accordingly, we cannot guarantee their compliance with ethical business practices, such as environmental responsibility, fair wage practices, appropriate sourcing of raw materials, and compliance with child labor laws, among others. A lack of demonstrated compliance could lead us to seek alternative suppliers, which could increase our costs and result in delayed delivery of our products, product shortages or other disruptions of our operations.

Violation of labor or other laws by our suppliers or the divergence of an independent supplier抯 labor or other practices from those generally accepted as ethical in the United States or other markets in which we do business could also attract negative publicity for us and our brand. This could diminish the value of our brand image and reduce demand for our performance electric vehicles if, as a result of such violation, we were to attract negative publicity. If we, or other manufacturers in our industry, encounter similar problems in the future, it could harm our brand image, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

38

 

Servicing our convertible senior notes requires a significant amount of cash, and we may not have sufficient cash flow from our business to pay our substantial debt.

We incurred $660.0 million, $920.0 million and $1.38 billion, respectively, in aggregate principal amount of senior indebtedness when we issued pursuant to registered public offerings 1.50% convertible senior notes due 2018 (2018 Notes) in 2013, and 0.25% convertible senior notes due 2019 (2019 Notes) and 1.25% convertible senior notes due 2021 (2021 Notes) in 2014. Our ability to make scheduled payments of the principal when due, to make quarterly interest payments or to make payments upon conversion or to refinance the Notes, depends on our future performance, which is subject to economic, financial, competitive and other factors beyond our control. Our business may not continue to generate cash flow from operations in the future sufficient to satisfy our obligations under the Notes and any future indebtedness we may incur and to make necessary capital expenditures. If we are unable to generate such cash flow, we may be required to adopt one or more alternatives, such as reducing or delaying investments or capital expenditures, selling assets, refinancing or obtaining additional equity capital on terms that may be onerous or highly dilutive. Our ability to refinance the Notes or future indebtedness will depend on the capital markets and our financial condition at such time. We may not be able to engage in any of these activities or engage in these activities on desirable terms, which could result in a default on the Notes or future indebtedness.

Pursuant to their terms, holders may convert their Notes at their option at any time prior to the final three-month period of the scheduled term of the respective Notes only under certain circumstances. For example, holders may generally convert their Notes at their option during a quarter (and only during such quarter), commencing with the fourth quarter of 2013 in the case of the 2018 Notes and the third quarter of 2014 in the case of the 2019 Notes and the 2021 Notes, if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on the last trading day of the immediately preceding quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price for such series of Notes on each applicable trading day. As a result of this conversion feature, the 2018 Notes have been convertible at their holders?option during each quarter commencing with the fourth quarter of 2013, except the first quarter of 2014.  Neither this nor any other conversion feature has been met with respect to the 2019 Notes and 2021 Notes, and consequently the 2019 Notes and 2021 have not been convertible at their holders?option Upon conversion of the Notes, we will be obligated to make cash payments in respect of the principal amounts thereof, and we may also have to deliver cash and, if applicable, shares of our common stock, in respect of such Notes. Any conversion of the Notes prior to their maturity, or acceleration of the repayment of the Notes or future indebtedness after any applicable notice or grace periods could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.

In addition, holders of the Notes will have the right to require us to purchase their Notes upon the occurrence of a fundamental change at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the fundamental change purchase date. However, we may not have enough available cash or be able to obtain financing at the time we are required to make purchases of Notes surrendered therefor or Notes being converted. In addition, our ability to purchase the Notes or to pay cash upon conversions of the Notes may be limited by law, by regulatory authority or by agreements governing our future indebtedness. Our failure to purchase Notes at a time when the purchase is required by the indenture or to pay cash payable on future conversions of the Notes as required by the indenture would constitute a default under the indenture. If the repayment of the related indebtedness were to be accelerated after any applicable notice or grace periods, we may not have sufficient funds to repay the indebtedness and purchase the Notes or make cash payments upon conversions thereof.

We may still incur substantially more debt or take other actions, which would intensify the risks discussed above.

We and our subsidiaries are not restricted under the terms of the indenture governing the Notes, or the indenture, from incurring additional debt, securing existing or future debt, recapitalizing our debt or taking a number of other actions that are not limited by the terms of the indenture that could have the effect of diminishing our ability to make payments on the Notes when due.

The classification of our Notes may have a material effect on our reported financial results.

As described in the Risk Factor 揝ervicing our convertible senior notes requires a significant amount of cash, and we may not have sufficient cash flow from our business to pay our substantial debt,?Notes have been historically, and may become in the future, convertible at the option of their holders prior to their scheduled terms under certain circumstances.  Even if holders do not elect to convert their Notes, the Notes become convertible prior to their scheduled maturity dates, we would be required to reclassify such Notes and the related debt issuance costs as current liabilities and certain portions of our equity outside of equity to mezzanine equity, which would have an adverse impact on our reported financial results for such quarter, and could have an adverse impact on the market price of our common stock.

39

 

Risks Related to the Ownership of our Common Stock

Concentration of ownership among our existing executive officers, directors and their affiliates may prevent new investors from influencing significant corporate decisions.

As of December 31, 2014, our executive officers, directors and their affiliates beneficially owned, in the aggregate, approximately 28.0% of our outstanding shares of common stock. In particular, Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer, Product Architect and Chairman of our Board of Directors, beneficially owned approximately 26.7% of our outstanding shares of common stock as of December 31, 2014. As a result, these stockholders will be able to exercise a significant level of control over all matters requiring stockholder approval, including the election of directors, amendment of our certificate of incorporation and approval of significant corporate transactions. This control could have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of our company or changes in management and will make the approval of certain transactions difficult or impossible without the support of these stockholders.

The trading price of our common stock is likely to continue to be volatile.

Our shares of common stock began trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market in 2010 and, therefore, the trading history for our common stock has been limited. In addition, the trading price of our common stock has been highly volatile and could continue to be subject to wide fluctuations in response to various factors, some of which are beyond our control. Our common stock has experienced an intra-day trading high of $291.42 per share and a low of $177.22 per share over the last 52 weeks.

In addition, the stock market in general, and the market for technology companies in particular, has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations that have often been unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of those companies. Broad market and industry factors may seriously affect the market price of companies?stock, including ours, regardless of actual operating performance. These fluctuations may be even more pronounced in the trading market for our stock during the period following a securities offering. In addition, in the past, following periods of volatility in the overall market and the market price of a particular company抯 securities, securities class action litigation has often been instituted against these companies. For example, a shareholder litigation like this was filed against us in 2013. While the trial court recently dismissed the plaintiffs?complaint with prejudice, this litigation (if the trial court抯 order is successfully appealed) or others like it could result in substantial costs and a diversion of our management抯 attention and resources.

A substantial portion of our total outstanding shares are held by a small number of insiders and investors and may be sold in the near future. The large number of shares eligible for public sale or subject to rights requiring us to register them for public sale could depress the market price of our common stock.

The market price of our common stock could decline as a result of sales of a large number of shares of our common stock in the market in the future, and the perception that these sales could occur may also depress the market price of our common stock. Stockholders owning a substantial portion of our total outstanding shares are entitled, under contracts providing for registration rights, to require us to register shares of our common stock owned by them for public sale in the United States, subject to the restrictions of Rule 144. In addition, we have registered shares previously issued or reserved for future issuance under our equity compensation plans and agreements, a portion of which are related to outstanding option awards. Subject to the satisfaction of applicable exercise periods and the shares of common stock issued upon exercise of outstanding options will be available for immediate resale in the United States in the open market. Sales of our common stock as restrictions end or pursuant to registration rights may make it more difficult for us to sell equity securities in the future at a time and at a price that we deem appropriate. These sales also could cause our stock price to fall and make it more difficult to sell shares of our common stock.

Conversion of the Notes may dilute the ownership interest of existing stockholders, including holders who had previously converted their Notes, or may otherwise depress the price of our common stock.

The conversion of some or all of the Notes will dilute the ownership interests of existing stockholders to the extent we deliver shares upon conversion of any of the Notes. As described in the Risk Factor 揝ervicing our convertible senior notes requires a significant amount of cash, and we may not have sufficient cash flow from our business to pay our substantial debt,?Notes have been historically, and may become in the future, convertible at the option of their holders prior to their scheduled terms under certain circumstances. Any sales in the public market of the common stock issuable upon such conversion could adversely affect prevailing market prices of our common stock. In addition, the existence of the Notes may encourage short selling by market participants because the conversion of the Notes could be used to satisfy short positions, or anticipated conversion of the Notes into shares of our common stock could depress the price of our common stock.

40

 

The convertible note hedge and warrant transactions we entered into in connection with the issuance of Notes may affect the value of the Notes and our common stock.

In connection with each issuance of the Notes, we entered into convertible note hedge transactions with the hedge counterparties. The convertible note hedge transactions cover, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments, the number of shares of our common stock that initially underlay the applicable Notes. The convertible note hedge transactions are expected to reduce the potential dilution and/or offset potential cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount upon conversion of the applicable Notes. We also entered into warrant transactions with the hedge counterparties relating to the same number of shares of our common stock, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments. However, the warrant transactions could separately have a dilutive effect on our common stock to the extent that the market price per share of our common stock exceeds the applicable strike price of the warrants on the applicable expiration dates.

In addition, the hedge counterparties or their affiliates may modify their hedge positions by entering into or unwinding various derivatives with respect to our common stock and/or purchasing or selling our common stock or other securities of ours in secondary market transactions prior to the maturity of the applicable Notes (and are likely to do so during any observation period related to a conversion of Notes). This activity could also cause or prevent an increase or a decrease in the market price of our common stock or the Notes.

We do not make any representation or prediction as to the direction or magnitude of any potential effect that the transactions described above may have on the prices of the Notes or the shares of our common stock. In addition, we do not make any representation that the hedge counterparties have engaged or will engage in these transactions or that these transactions, once commenced, will not be discontinued without notice.

Mr. Musk borrowed funds from affiliates of certain underwriters in our public offerings and/or private placements and has pledged shares of our common stock to secure these borrowings. The forced sale of these shares pursuant to a margin call could cause our stock price to decline and negatively impact our business.

Beginning in June 2011, banking institutions that are affiliated with certain underwriters of our completed public offerings of common stock and Notes made extensions of credit to Elon Musk and the Elon Musk Revocable Trust dated July 22, 2003, or the Trust, a portion of which Mr. Musk used to purchase shares of common stock in our public offering in May 2013 and private placements in June 2011 and June 2013. Interest on such loans accrues at market rates and the banking institutions received customary fees and expense reimbursements in connection with these loans.

We are not a party to these loans, which are full recourse against Mr. Musk and the Trust and are secured by pledges of a portion of the Tesla common stock currently owned by Mr. Musk and the Trust and other shares of capital stock of unrelated entities owned by Mr. Musk and the Trust. The terms of these loans were negotiated directly between Mr. Musk and the applicable banking institutions.

If the price of our common stock declines, Mr. Musk may be forced by one or more of the banking institutions to provide additional collateral for the loans or to sell shares of Tesla common stock in order to remain within the margin limitations imposed under the terms of his loans. The loans between these banking institutions on the one hand, and Mr. Musk and the Trust on the other hand, prohibit the non-pledged shares currently owned by Mr. Musk and the Trust from being pledged to secure any other loans. These factors may limit Mr. Musk抯 ability to either pledge additional shares of Tesla common stock or sell shares of Tesla common stock as a means to avoid or satisfy a margin call with respect to his pledged Tesla common stock in the event of a decline in our stock price that is large enough to trigger a margin call. Any sales of common stock following a margin call that is not satisfied may cause the price of our common stock to decline further.

Anti-takeover provisions contained in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws, the provisions of Delaware law, and the terms of our convertible notes could impair a takeover attempt.

Our certificate of incorporation, bylaws, Delaware law and the terms of our Notes contain provisions which could have the effect of rendering more difficult, delaying or preventing an acquisition deemed undesirable by our board of directors. Our corporate governance documents include provisions:

?

creating a classified board of directors whose members serve staggered three-year terms;

?

authorizing 揵lank check?preferred stock, which could be issued by the board without stockholder approval and may contain voting, liquidation, dividend and other rights superior to our common stock;

?

limiting the liability of, and providing indemnification to, our directors and officers;

?

limiting the ability of our stockholders to call and bring business before special meetings;

?

requiring advance notice of stockholder proposals for business to be conducted at meetings of our stockholders and for nominations of candidates for election to our board of directors;

41

 

?

controlling the procedures for the conduct and scheduling of board and stockholder meetings; and

?

providing the board of directors with the express power to postpone previously scheduled annual meetings and to cancel previously scheduled special meetings.

These provisions, alone or together, could delay or prevent hostile takeovers and changes in control or changes in our management.

As a Delaware corporation, we are also subject to provisions of Delaware law, including Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation law, which prevents some stockholders holding more than 15% of our outstanding common stock from engaging in certain business combinations without approval of the holders of substantially all of our outstanding common stock.

Any provision of our certificate of incorporation or bylaws or Delaware law that has the effect of delaying or deterring a change in control could limit the opportunity for our stockholders to receive a premium for their shares of our common stock, and could also affect the price that some investors are willing to pay for our common stock.

In addition, the terms of the convertible notes require us to repurchase the convertible notes in the event of a fundamental change. A takeover of our company would trigger an option of the holders of the convertible notes to require us to repurchase the convertible notes. This may have the effect of delaying or preventing a takeover of our company that would otherwise be beneficial to our stockholders or investors in the convertible notes.

The fundamental change repurchase feature of the Notes may delay or prevent an otherwise beneficial attempt to take over our company.

The terms of the Notes require us to repurchase the Notes in the event of a fundamental change. A takeover of our company would trigger options by the respective holders of the applicable Notes to require us to repurchase such Notes. This may have the effect of delaying or preventing a takeover of our company that would otherwise be beneficial to our stockholders or investors in the Notes.

If securities or industry analysts publishing research or reports about us, our business or our market change their recommendations regarding our stock adversely or cease to publish research or reports about us, our stock price and trading volume could decline.

The trading market for our common stock will be influenced by the research and reports that industry or securities analysts may publish about us, our business, our market or our competitors. If any of the analysts who may cover us change their recommendation regarding our stock adversely, or provide more favorable relative recommendations about our competitors, our stock price would likely decline. If any analyst who may cover us were to cease coverage of our company or fail to regularly publish reports on us, we could lose visibility in the financial markets, which in turn could cause our stock price or trading volume to decline.

 

 

ITEM 1B.

UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS

None.Industry and Business Risks

The worldwide automotive market is highly competitive.

The worldwide automotive market is highly competitive. Toyota faces intense competition from automotive manufacturers in the markets in which it operates. Although the global economy continues to recover gradually, competition in the automotive industry has further intensified amidst difficult overall market conditions. In addition, competition is likely to further intensify in light of further continuing globalization in the worldwide

 

4

Table of Contents
automotive industry, possibly resulting in further industry reorganization. Factors affecting competition include product quality and features, safety, reliability, fuel economy, the amount of time required for innovation and development, pricing, customer service and financing terms. Increased competition may lead to lower vehicle unit sales, which may result in a further downward price pressure and adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. Toyota’s ability to adequately respond to the recent rapid changes in the automotive market and to maintain its competitiveness will be fundamental to its future success in existing and new markets and to maintain its market share. There can be no assurances that Toyota will be able to compete successfully in the future.

The worldwide automotive industry is highly volatile.

Each of the markets in which Toyota competes has been subject to considerable volatility in demand. Demand for vehicles depends to a large extent on social, political and economic conditions in a given market and the introduction of new vehicles and technologies. As Toyota’s revenues are derived from sales in markets worldwide, economic conditions in such markets are particularly important to Toyota. In Japan, the economy gradually recovered due to increasing personal consumption and last-minute demand spurred by the increase of the consumption tax. In the United States, the economy has seen ongoing gradual recovery mainly due to increasing personal consumption and the European economy has shown signs of recovery. Meanwhile, growth in emerging markets slowed down due to weakening currencies of emerging markets stemming from U.S. monetary easing beginning to be curtailed, increases in interest rates of emerging markets to protect the local currency, and political instability in some nations. The shifts in demand for automobiles is continuing, and it is unclear how this situation will transition in the future. Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected if the shifts in demand for automobiles continues or progresses further. Demand may also be affected by factors directly impacting vehicle price or the cost of purchasing and operating vehicles such as sales and financing incentives, prices of raw materials and parts and components, cost of fuel and governmental regulations (including tariffs, import regulation and other taxes). Volatility in demand may lead to lower vehicle unit sales, which may result in downward price pressure and adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s future success depends on its ability to offer new innovative competitively priced products that meet customer demand on a timely basis.

Meeting customer demand by introducing attractive new vehicles and reducing the amount of time required for product development are critical to automotive manufacturers. In particular, it is critical to meet customer demand with respect to quality, safety and reliability. The timely introduction of new vehicle models, at competitive prices, meeting rapidly changing customer preferences and demand is more fundamental to Toyota’s success than ever, as the automotive market is rapidly transforming in light of the changing global economy. There is no assurance, however, that Toyota will adequately and appropriately respond to changing customer preferences and demand with respect to quality, safety, reliability, styling and other features in a timely manner. Even if Toyota succeeds in perceiving customer preferences and demand, there is no assurance that Toyota will be capable of developing and manufacturing new, price competitive products in a timely manner with its available technology, intellectual property, sources of raw materials and parts and components, and production capacity, including cost reduction capacity. Further, there is no assurance that Toyota will be able to implement capital expenditures at the level and times planned by management. Toyota’s inability to develop and offer products that meet customers’ preferences and demand with respect to quality, safety, reliability, styling and other features in a timely manner could result in a lower market share and reduced sales volumes and margins, and may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s ability to market and distribute effectively is an integral part of Toyota’s successful sales.

Toyota’s success in the sale of vehicles depends on its ability to market and distribute effectively based on distribution networks and sales techniques tailored to the needs of its customers. There is no assurance that

 

5

Table of Contents
Toyota will be able to develop sales techniques and distribution networks that effectively adapt to changing customer preferences or changes in the regulatory environment in the major markets in which it operates. Toyota’s inability to maintain well-developed sales techniques and distribution networks may result in decreased sales and market share and may adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s success is significantly impacted by its ability to maintain and develop its brand image.

In the highly competitive automotive industry, it is critical to maintain and develop a brand image. In order to maintain and develop a brand image, it is necessary to further increase customers’ confidence by providing safe, high-quality products that meet customer preferences and demand. If Toyota is unable to effectively maintain and develop its brand image as a result of its inability to provide safe, high-quality products or as a result of the failure to promptly implement safety measures such as recalls when necessary, vehicle unit sales and/or sale prices may decrease, and as a result revenues and profits may not increase as expected or may decrease, adversely affecting its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota relies on suppliers for the provision of certain supplies including parts, components and raw materials.

Toyota purchases supplies including parts, components and raw materials from a number of external suppliers located around the world. For some supplies, Toyota relies on a single supplier or a limited number of suppliers, whose replacement with another supplier may be difficult. Inability to obtain supplies from a single or limited source supplier may result in difficulty obtaining supplies and may restrict Toyota’s ability to produce vehicles. Furthermore, even if Toyota were to rely on a large number of suppliers, first-tier suppliers with whom Toyota directly transacts may in turn rely on a single second-tier supplier or limited second-tier suppliers. Toyota’s ability to continue to obtain supplies from its suppliers in a timely and cost-effective manner is subject to a number of factors, some of which are not within Toyota’s control. These factors include the ability of Toyota’s suppliers to provide a continued source of supply, and Toyota’s ability to effectively compete and obtain competitive prices from suppliers. A loss of any single or limited source supplier or inability to obtain supplies from suppliers in a timely and cost-effective manner could lead to increased costs or delays or suspensions in Toyota’s production and deliveries, which could have an adverse effect on Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

The worldwide financial services industry is highly competitive.

The worldwide financial services industry is highly competitive. Increased competition in automobile financing may lead to decreased margins. A decline in Toyota’s vehicle unit sales, an increase in residual value risk due to lower used vehicle price, an increase in the ratio of credit losses and increased funding costs are factors which may impact Toyota’s financial services operations. If Toyota is unable to adequately respond to the changes and competition in automobile financing, Toyota’s financial services operations may adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s operations and vehicles rely on various digital and information technologies.

Toyota depends on various information technology networks and systems, some of which are managed by third parties, to process, transmit and store electronic information, including sensitive data, and to manage or support a variety of business processes and activities, including manufacturing, research and development, supply chain management, sales and accounting. In addition, Toyota’s vehicles may rely on various digital and information technologies, including information service and driving assistance functions. Despite security measures, Toyota’s digital and information technology networks and systems may be vulnerable to damage, disruptions or shutdowns due to attacks by hackers, computer viruses, breaches due to unauthorized use, errors or malfeasance by employees and others who have or gain access to the networks and systems Toyota depends on, service failures or bankruptcy of third parties such as software development or cloud computing vendors, power shortages and outages, and utility failures or other catastrophic events like natural disasters. Such incidents could

 

6

Table of Contents
materially disrupt critical operations, disclose sensitive data, interfere with information services and driving assistance functions in Toyota’s vehicles, and/or give rise to legal claims or proceedings, liability or regulatory penalties under applicable laws, which could have an adverse effect on Toyota’s brand image and its financial condition and results of operations.

Financial Market and Economic Risks

Toyota’s operations are subject to currency and interest rate fluctuations.

Toyota is sensitive to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and is principally exposed to fluctuations in the value of the Japanese yen, the U.S. dollar and the euro and, to a lesser extent, the Australian dollar, the Russian ruble, the Canadian dollar and the British pound. Toyota’s consolidated financial statements, which are presented in Japanese yen, are affected by foreign currency exchange fluctuations through translation risk, and changes in foreign currency exchange rates may also affect the price of products sold and materials purchased by Toyota in foreign currencies through transaction risk. In particular, strengthening of the Japanese yen against the U.S. dollar can have an adverse effect on Toyota’s operating results.

Toyota believes that its use of certain derivative financial instruments including foreign exchange forward contracts and interest rate swaps and increased localized production of its products have reduced, but not eliminated, the effects of interest rate and foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. Nonetheless, a negative impact resulting from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and changes in interest rates may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. For a further discussion of currency and interest rate fluctuations and the use of derivative financial instruments, see “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects — Operating Results — Overview — Currency Fluctuations”, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk”, and notes 20 and 21 to Toyota’s consolidated financial statements.

High prices of raw materials and strong pressure on Toyota’s suppliers could negatively impact Toyota’s profitability.

Increases in prices for raw materials that Toyota and Toyota’s suppliers use in manufacturing their products or parts and components such as steel, precious metals, non-ferrous alloys including aluminum, and plastic parts, may lead to higher production costs for parts and components. This could, in turn, negatively impact Toyota’s future profitability because Toyota may not be able to pass all those costs on to its customers or require its suppliers to absorb such costs.

The downturn in the financial markets could adversely affect Toyota’s ability to raise capital.

Should the world economy suddenly deteriorate, a number of financial institutions and investors will face difficulties in providing capital to the financial markets at levels corresponding to their own financial capacity, and, as a result, there is a risk that companies may not be able to raise capital under terms that they would expect to receive with their creditworthiness. If Toyota is unable to raise the necessary capital under appropriate conditions on a timely basis, Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected.

Political, Regulatory, Legal and Other Risks

The automotive industry is subject to various governmental regulations.

The worldwide automotive industry is subject to various laws and governmental regulations including those related to vehicle safety and environmental matters such as emission levels, fuel economy, noise and pollution. In particular, automotive manufacturers such as Toyota are required to implement safety measures such as recalls for vehicles that do not or may not comply with the safety standards of laws and governmental regulations. In addition, Toyota may, in order to reassure its customers of the safety of Toyota’s vehicles, decide to voluntarily implement recalls or other safety measures even if the vehicle complies with the safety standards of relevant laws

 

7

Table of Contents
and governmental regulations. Many governments also impose tariffs and other trade barriers, taxes and levies, or enact price or exchange controls. Toyota has incurred, and expects to incur in the future, significant costs in complying with these regulations. If Toyota launches products that result in safety measures such as recalls, Toyota may incur various costs including significant costs for free repairs. Furthermore, new legislation or changes in existing legislation may also subject Toyota to additional expenses in the future. If Toyota incurs significant costs related to implementing safety measures or meeting laws and governmental regulations, Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected.

Toyota may become subject to various legal proceedings.

As an automotive manufacturer, Toyota may become subject to legal proceedings in respect of various issues, including product liability and infringement of intellectual property. Toyota may also be subject to legal proceedings brought by its shareholders and governmental proceedings and investigations. Toyota is in fact currently subject to a number of pending legal proceedings and government investigations. A negative outcome in one or more of these pending legal proceedings could adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. For a further discussion of governmental regulations, see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Governmental Regulation, Environmental and Safety Standards” and for legal proceedings, please see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Legal Proceedings”.

Toyota may be adversely affected by natural calamities, political and economic instability, fuel shortages or interruptions in social infrastructure, wars, terrorism and labor strikes.

Toyota is subject to various risks associated with conducting business worldwide. These risks include natural calamities; political and economic instability; fuel shortages; interruption in social infrastructure including energy supply, transportation systems, gas, water, or communication systems resulting from natural hazards or technological hazards; wars; terrorism; labor strikes and work stoppages. Should the major markets in which Toyota purchases materials, parts and components and supplies for the manufacture of Toyota products or in which Toyota’s products are produced, distributed or sold be affected by any of these events, it may result in disruptions and delays in the operations of Toyota’s business. Should significant or prolonged disruptions or delays related to Toyota’s business operations occur, it may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.The Worldwide Automotive Market

Toyota estimates that annual worldwide vehicle sales totaled approximately 86 million units in 2013.

Automobile sales are affected by a number of factors including:

 

 	•	 	
social, political and economic conditions,

 

 	•	 	
introduction of new vehicles and technologies, and

 

 	•	 	
costs incurred by customers to purchase and operate automobiles.

These factors can cause consumer demand to vary substantially from year to year in different geographic markets and in individual categories of automobiles.

In fiscal 2014, the global economy experienced strengthening in developed countries including the United States and European countries, while growth in emerging markets slowed down due to weakening currencies of emerging markets stemming from U.S. monetary easing beginning to be curtailed, increases in interest rates of emerging markets to protect the local currency, and political instability in some nations. The automotive industry was also impacted by this trend. In fiscal 2013, with respect to developed countries, markets in the United States expanded. In addition, the prolonged downward pressure from the sovereign debt crisis and fiscal austerity measures has finally bottomed out in Europe. Further, in Japan, the market expanded as the economy picked up due to monetary easing and fiscal policies, among other factors. In emerging markets, the expansion of the Chinese market accelerated, reaching double-digit growth, but markets in other emerging countries slowed from the speed of expansion seen until the prior year.

However, in the medium- to long-term, Toyota expects the automotive market to grow driven principally by the growth in emerging markets. Global competition is expected to be severe, as competition in compact and low-price vehicles intensifies, and technological development and development of new products become more frequent with a heightened global awareness of the environment and more stringent fuel economy standards.

In 2013, China, North America, Europe, and Asia were the world’s largest automotive markets. The share of each market across the globe, which Toyota estimates based on the available automobile sales data in each country and region information, was 26% for China, 22% for North America (20% excluding Mexico and Puerto Rico), 21% for Europe, and 10% for Asia. In China, new vehicle sales increased to approximately 22.2 million units. In North America, new vehicle sales increased to approximately 18.5 million units. In Europe, new vehicle sales slightly decreased to approximately 18.0 million units. In Asia (including India but excluding Japan and China), new vehicle unit sales remained generally unchanged at approximately 9.0 million units.

 

10

Table of Contents
The worldwide automotive industry is affected significantly by government regulations aimed at reducing harmful effects on the environment, enhancing vehicle safety and improving fuel economy. These regulations have added to the cost of manufacturing vehicles. Many governments also mandate local procurement of parts and components and impose tariffs and other trade barriers and price or exchange controls as a means of creating jobs, protecting domestic producers or influencing their balance of payments. Changes in regulatory requirements and other government-imposed restrictions can limit an automaker’s operations. These regulations can also make it difficult to repatriate profits to an automaker’s home country.

The development of the worldwide automotive market includes the continuing globalization of automotive operations. Manufacturers seek to achieve globalization by localizing the design and manufacture of automobiles and their parts and components in the markets in which they are sold. By expanding production capabilities beyond their home markets, automotive manufacturers are able to reduce their exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates as well as to trade restrictions and tariffs.

Since 2000, various transactions have promoted consolidation within the global automotive industry. There are various reasons behind these transactions including the need to respond to the excessive global capacity in the production of automobiles, the need to reduce costs and improve efficiency by increasing the number of automobiles produced using common vehicle platforms and by sharing research and development expenses for environmental and other technology, the desire to expand a company’s global presence through increased size and the desire to expand into particular segments or geographic markets. Recently these have included global business alliances and investments between manufacturers.

Toyota believes that its research and development initiatives, particularly the development of environmentally friendly new vehicle technologies, vehicle safety and information technology, provide it with a strategic advantage.

Toyota’s ability to compete in the global automotive industry will depend in part on Toyota’s successful implementation of its business strategy. This is subject to a number of factors, some of which are not in Toyota’s control. These factors are discussed in “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects” and elsewhere in this annual report.

Toyota Global Vision

In March 2011, Toyota unveiled its “Toyota Global Vision” corporate outline for the future, which serves not only to give direction to Toyota employees around the world, but also to convey such direction to customers and to the public at large. Toyota will work to achieve sustained growth through the realization of the following ideals which are parts of the Vision:

“The safest and most responsible ways of moving people”

 

 	•	 	
Safety is Toyota’s highest priority, and Toyota will continue to provide world-class safety.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will also continue to contribute to environmental quality and to human happiness by using leading environmental technology and by deploying that technology in a growing line of vehicle models. At the same time, Toyota will work through the provision of products, sales and services that exceed customer expectation to offer a rewarding experience for customers.

“Enriching lives around the world”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota has been consistently true to its founding spirit of serving society through conscientious manufacturing, and it will continue working in that spirit to contribute to enhance the quality of life wherever it has operations.

 

11

Table of Contents
 	•	 	
Toyota will strive to continue contributing to economic vitality wherever it has operations by generating stable employment and by participating in mutually beneficial business relationships with dealers and suppliers. It will also strive to continue to actively engage in initiatives for human resources development and the promotion of cultural activities of its host communities.

“Lead the way to the future of mobility”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will lead the industry in technological development that will spawn next-generation mobility. For example, it will explore possibilities in personal mobility and in the convergence of information technology for automobiles and “smart grids” for optimizing energy generation and consumption. Toyota will strive to offer products and services that match the needs in each market.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will strive to advance environmental technology and develop low-carbon technologies and technologies for maximizing safety through interaction with the transport infrastructure to lay a foundation for sustainable and amenable future mobility.

“Our commitment to quality, constant innovation”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota is committed to providing quality vehicles that are highly reliable and driven with a sense of safety and reliability.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will constantly reinvent itself and continue to engage in cutting-edge technology development. Toyota will work towards offering vehicles around the world that address the needs of today and of tomorrow at affordable prices.

“Continued awareness for the Earth and environment”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will continue to work towards minimizing environmental impact in its manufacturing and other operations, and products.

 

 	•	 	
With an emphasis on environmental awareness, Toyota will in its operations work towards energy conservation, reduction in carbon dioxide emission, efficient use of resources such as recycling, and human resource development and production methods that allow for coexistence with nature.

“Exceed expectations and be rewarded with a smile”

 

 	•	 	
Everyone at Toyota will continuously maintain a sense of gratitude to customers and will strive to earn smiles with products and services that are stimulating and inspiring and exceed customer expectation.

“There is always a better way”

 

 	•	 	
All Toyota employees will share the recognition that there is always a better way and share a commitment to continuous improvement, which are fundamental to The Toyota Way.

“Meet challenging goals by engaging the talent and passion of people”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will nurture a corporate culture where teamwork and individual creativity thrive and where people will approach their work with pride and passion.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will honor the spirit of diversity in recruiting, training and promoting capable individuals around the world. Human resources development at Toyota will continue to promote the transfer of the company’s monozukuri spirit of conscientious manufacturing and related skills and know-how from one generation to the next.

As for our future business environment, the world economy is expected to benefit from ongoing moderate recovery in the U.S. and a gradual move toward recovery in Europe. Meanwhile, some emerging countries show signs of uncertainty. The Japanese economy is expected to remain on a recovery trend, backed by an improved

 

12

Table of Contents
environment for exports and the effects of various policy measures. Attention should be paid, however, to downside risks mainly from the continuing uncertainty of overseas economies especially in emerging countries, and the downturn in consumption following a surge in last-minute demand spurred by the consumption tax increase in Japan.

The automotive market is expected to see expansion mainly in the U.S.; however, amid the change in market structure, as seen in the expansion and diversification of demand for eco-cars backed by rising environmental consciousness and rapid advances in information and communication technology, fierce competition exists on a global scale.

In this severe business environment, the Toyota group is progressing steadily toward the realization of the Toyota Global Vision by strengthening competitiveness and realizing innovations in order to achieve sustainable growth. The Toyota group as a whole will continue to make greater efforts to address the following:

First, we will further pursue the manufacturing of “ever-better cars” based on the “Toyota New Global Architecture” (“TNGA”), a new framework for fundamentally reconsidering work procedures, in order to launch attractive products globally in a timely and efficient manner. For the Toyota brand, we intend to provide customers with attractive products such as next-generation eco-cars in developed countries, and establish a sustainable business base by reinforcing product competitiveness through the development of vehicles matched to various markets in emerging countries. For the Lexus brand, we intend to establish a global premium brand from Japan that is unbound by preconceptions.

Second, we intend to implement innovative activities to lead the future. In the automotive business, we plan to work toward the creation of values such as new lifestyles, and to foray into new fields with a venture spirit in the area of new businesses.

Third, we intend to promote activities to solidify our foundations in order to strengthen our competitiveness. We intend to improve our base for manufacturing “ever-better cars” through quality improvement, as well as through cost-reduction activities toward building a robust business base that will be little affected by changes in foreign exchange rates or the number of units manufactured or sold, the further promotion of human resource development for the enhancement of our global competitiveness, and business innovations using IT.

Based on these efforts, Toyota will contribute to realize “enriching lives of communities” through providing “ever-better cars” that exceed customer expectations. This is expected to encourage more customers to purchase Toyota cars and thereby lead to the establishment of a stable business base. By perpetuating this positive cycle, we will aim to realize sustainable growth and enhance corporate value. In addition, through full observance of corporate ethics such as compliance with applicable laws and regulations, Toyota will fulfill its social responsibilities by carrying out its Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).

Automotive Operations

Toyota’s revenues from its automotive operations were ¥23,781.4 billion in fiscal 2014, ¥20,419.1 billion in fiscal 2013 and ¥16,994.5 billion in fiscal 2012.

Toyota produces and sells passenger cars, minivans and commercial vehicles such as trucks. Toyota Motor Corporation’s subsidiary, Daihatsu Motor Co., Ltd. (“Daihatsu”), produces and sells mini-vehicles and compact cars. Hino Motors, Ltd. (“Hino”), also a subsidiary of Toyota Motor Corporation, produces and sells commercial vehicles such as trucks and buses. Toyota also manufactures automotive parts, components and accessories for its own use and for sale to others.

 

13

Table of Contents
Vehicle Models

Toyota’s vehicles (produced by Toyota, Daihatsu and Hino) can be classified into two categories: hybrid vehicles and conventional engine vehicles. Toyota’s product line-up includes subcompact and compact cars, mini-vehicles, mid-size, luxury, sports and specialty cars, recreational and sport-utility vehicles, pickup trucks, minivans, trucks and buses.

Hybrid Vehicles

The world’s first mass-produced hybrid car was Toyota’s Prius. It runs on an efficient combination of a gasoline engine and motor. This system allows the Prius to travel more efficiently than conventional engine vehicles of comparable size and performance. The hybrid design of the Prius also results in the output of 75% less emission than the maximum amount allowed by Japanese environmental regulations. Toyota views the Prius as the cornerstone of its emphasis on designing and producing eco-friendly automobiles.

In May 2008, Toyota introduced the hybrid version of the Crown, which is the signature model of the Toyota brand, in Japan. In April 2009, the Lexus RX450h, which is the fully remodeled Lexus RX400h, was successively introduced in Japan, North America and Europe. The Prius, whose name has become synonymous with hybrid vehicles, underwent its second full model change in May 2009. The hybrid vehicles HS250h and SAI were introduced in July 2009 and December 2009, respectively. In December 2009, Toyota began leasing the Prius plug-in hybrid equipped with a lithium ion battery targeted at certain corporate users including electrical power companies. In January 2011, the Lexus hybrid vehicle CT200h was also introduced. Further, Toyota introduced the Prius a (Prius Alpha) wagon in May 2011 and is planning further ways to enhance the Prius series lineup. Furthermore, Toyota has strengthened its hybrid lineup by introducing hybrid versions of the Camry in September 2011, the Alphard and the Vellfire in November 2011, the compact hybrid vehicle Aqua in December 2011, the Prius plug-in and the fully remodeled GS450h in January 2012, the Yaris HV in May 2012, ES300h in July 2012, the Auris HV in November 2012 and the Avalon HV, the fully remodeled Crown HV in December 2012, the fully remodeled IS300h in May 2013, the fully remodeled Corolla Axio HV/Corolla Fielder HV in August 2013, the fully remodeled Harrier HV in December 2013 and the fully remodeled Voxy HV/Noah HV in January 2014. Toyota anticipates strong growth in the hybrid vehicles area and will continue to introduce new models.

Toyota began limited sales of a fuel cell hybrid vehicle in Japan and the United States in December 2002. In June 2005, Toyota’s new fuel cell hybrid passenger vehicle became the first in Japan to acquire vehicle type certification under the Road Vehicles Act, as amended, on March 31, 2005, by Japan’s Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. Leases for the vehicle began in July 2005. By 2007, Toyota was able to make improvements to start-up and cruising distance at temperatures below freezing, which were technological challenges. Toyota has made advances by solving technological issues such as the above and has been working towards the practical use of such solutions.

Toyota aims to continue its efforts to offer a diverse line-up of hybrid vehicles, enhance engine power while improving fuel economy and otherwise work towards increasing the sales of hybrid vehicles.

Conventional Engine Vehicles

Subcompact and Compact

Toyota’s subcompact and compact cars include the four-door Corolla sedan, which is one of Toyota’s best selling models. The Yaris, marketed as the Vitz in Japan, is a subcompact car designed to perform better and offer greater comfort than other compact cars available in the market, with low emissions that are particularly attractive to European consumers. In Japan, Toyota introduced the micropremium iQ in November 2008, the remodeled Passo in February 2010, the remodeled Ractis in November 2010, the remodeled Vitz in December 2010, the remodeled Corolla Axio/Fielder in May 2012, the remodeled Porte and its variant, the Spade, in

 

14

Table of Contents
July 2012 and the remodeled Auris in August 2012. In India, Asia, China and other markets, Toyota introduced the Etios and Vios. In addition, Toyota introduced the AGYA, which is designed and manufactured by Daihatsu.

Mini-Vehicles

Mini-vehicles are manufactured and sold by Daihatsu. Daihatsu manufactures mini-vehicles, passenger vehicles, commercial vehicles and auto parts. Mini-vehicles are passenger cars, vans or trucks with engine displacements of 660 cubic centimeters or less. Daihatsu sold approximately 685 thousand mini-vehicles and 217 thousand automobiles on a consolidated basis during fiscal 2014. Daihatsu’s largest market is Japan, which accounted for approximately 80% of Daihatsu’s unit sales during fiscal 2014. From 2011, Toyota began to sell some mini-vehicles manufactured by Daihatsu under the Toyota brand.

Mid-Size

Toyota’s mid-size models include the Camry, which has been the best selling passenger car in the United States for sixteen of the past seventeen calendar years (from 1997 to present) and also for the last twelve consecutive years. The Camry was fully remodeled in August 2011. Camry sales in the United States for 2013 were approximately 408 thousand units (including Camry hybrids). In addition, Toyota’s other mid-size models include (i) the REIZ for the Chinese market, (ii) the Avensis, which was remodeled in November 2008 for the European market, and (iii) the Mark X, which was remodeled in October 2009 for the Japanese market.

Luxury & Large

In North America, Europe, Japan and other regions, Toyota’s luxury lineup consists primarily of vehicles sold under the Lexus brand name. Lexus passenger car models include the LS, the GS, the ES, the IS, the CT, and the LFA. Lexus models also include the LX, the GX, and the RX sold as luxury sport-utility vehicles in the United States. Toyota commenced sales of its luxury automobiles in Japan under the Lexus brand in August 2005. As of March 31, 2014, the Lexus brand lineup in Japan includes the LS, the GS, the HS, the IS, the CT, the RX, and the LFA. The Toyota brand’s full-size luxury car, the Avalon, was remodeled in October 2012, and the Crown was remodeled in December 2012. Toyota also sells the Century limousine in Japan.

Sports and Specialty

In the United States Toyota sells the Scion tC, a sports model targeted at young drivers. In December 2010, Toyota introduced the LFA model under the Lexus brand as the high-performance sports model, and in April 2012, Toyota introduced the 86 (called Scion FR-S in the U.S.), a compact sports car with a front-mounted engine and rear-wheel drive.

Recreational and Sport-Utility Vehicles and Pickup Trucks

Toyota sells a variety of sport-utility vehicles and pickup trucks. Toyota sport-utility vehicles available in North America include the Sequoia, the 4Runner, the RAV4, the Highlander, the FJ Cruiser and the Land Cruiser, and pickup trucks available are the Tacoma and Tundra. The Tacoma, the Tundra, the Highlander and the Sequoia are manufactured in the United States. Toyota also offers three types of sport-utility vehicles under the Lexus brand, including the LX, the GX, and the RX. Toyota also manufactures the RX and RAV4 models in Canada. Toyota’s pickup truck, the Hilux, has been the best selling model of all Toyota cars sold in Thailand. In December 2008, Toyota introduced the new Venza in North America. The fully remodeled RX was introduced in 2009. In North America, the fully remodeled RAV4 was introduced in December 2012 and the fully remodeled Highlander was introduced in December 2013.

 

15

Table of Contents
Minivans and Cabwagons
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT, PATENTS AND LICENSES

Toyota believes that its long-term success depends on its ability to secure a leadership position with respect to vehicle research and development.

Toyota’s research and development expenditures were approximately ¥910.5 billion in fiscal 2014, ¥807.4 billion in fiscal 2013 and ¥779.8 billion in fiscal 2012.

For this reason, Toyota is promoting next generation environmentally friendly, energy efficient, and safe vehicle technology in its research and development. Toyota is making efforts to produce vehicles that are friendly to the environment and human beings, with efforts focused in the following fields:

 

 	•	 	
further improvements in hybrid technologies (functions, costs, etc.) and subsequent environmental contributions;

 

 	•	 	
improvement in gasoline engine fuel economy and improvement of technology in connection with more stringent emissions standards;

 

 	•	 	
promoting improvements in clean diesel engine functioning and fuel economy;

 

 	•	 	
development of electric vehicles, fuel-electric vehicles and other alternative fuel vehicles; and

 

 	•	 	
development of technology designed to promote driving and vehicle safety.

Toyota’s belief is that the environment is one of the most important issues. Toyota is aiming to lower the volume of carbon dioxide emissions at all stages of operations, including development, production, logistics, usage, disposal and recycling of vehicles, as well as the reduction of environmental burdens. Toyota also utilizes various energy resources as a substitute to oil, and has successfully developed a plug-in hybrid vehicle which can be charged from domestic power supplies. Toyota is committed to realize the mass production of electric vehicles, the development of next-generation batteries, and the development of alternative fuel vehicles such as biofuel and fuel-cell vehicles. Toyota aims to maintain its leadership position in environmental technology, and is responding to environmental issues, the representative example being the Prius, the hybrid car introduced to the Japanese market in 1997.

In May 2010, Toyota invested in Tesla Motors, Inc. (“Tesla”) in the amount of $50 million as part of a basic agreement with Tesla to implement a joint venture related to the development, technology, and production systems of electric vehicles and their components. At the 26th International Battery, Hybrid and Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle Symposium held in May 2012, Toyota announced the jointly developed electric vehicle, the RAV4 EV, which was released in California in summer 2012.

Toyota’s research and development activities focus on the environment, vehicle safety, information technology and product development.

Toyota’s environmental research and development activities focus on:

 

 	•	 	
Developing fuel-efficient engines and transmissions. These technologies include improved technologies in fuel economy, emission, and performance, such as the development of next-generation direct

 

90

Table of Contents
 	
injection system and variable valve system for gasoline engines and the development of the next-generation ultra high pressure common rail system and the diesel particulate and nitrous oxide reduction system for diesel engines.

 

 	•	 	
Developing alternative fuel powering systems for commercial sale. This includes developing hybrid vehicles and fuel cell hybrid vehicles. The second-generation Prius that Toyota introduced in September 2003 features a new hybrid system which decreases negative environmental impact while increasing power and performance. Furthermore, the third-generation Prius was introduced in 2009, and broke the record for sales by vehicle type which was previously held by the Corolla. The Aqua (called Prius c in the US), introduced in December 2011 and sold in approximately 50 countries worldwide, is a world leader in fuel economy and low pricing. In addition, Toyota’s cumulative sales of hybrid vehicles has exceeded 5 million units, which contributed approximately 34 million ton reduction in CO2 emissions. In July 2007, Toyota developed the Plug-in Hybrid Vehicle (“PHV”) and received certification from Japan’s Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism (“MLIT”). PHV runs as an Electric Vehicle (“EV”) in short distances and runs as a regular hybrid vehicle in long distances. Tests are conducted in Japan, North America and Europe and in late 2009, Toyota commenced its sale of PHV with lithium ion batteries to fleet vehicle users in Japan, North America and Europe. Toyota also commenced its sale of PHV models in January 2012, which can be charged from domestic power supplies in Japan, North America and Europe. In addition, in September 2008, Toyota started leasing the new Toyota Fuel Cell Hybrid Vehicle — advanced (the “new Toyota FCHV-adv”). The new Toyota FCHV-adv has completely overhauled its fuel cell system and has made significant improvements to low-temperature startup performance and cruising distance, which had posed challenges to promoting its widespread use. Toyota believes that fuel cell vehicles will be strong eco-cars for future generations. By 2015, Toyota plans to introduce sedan-type fuel cell vehicles at reasonable prices for customers in Japan, the United States and Europe where appropriate infrastructure is expected to be available. To control increases in oil prices and reduce the consumption of oil, the proliferation of fuel alternatives to oil such as biofuel and natural gas is expanding in some countries. Toyota works towards the ongoing formation of a mobility society through the introduction to the market of low-ethanol content vehicles (“E10”), natural gas vehicles and high-concentration flex-fuel vehicles (“FFV”) that are compatible with ethanol fuel, as well as through research and development into other practical uses of oil alternatives and biofuels, such as research into fuels that will not compete with food production, and into genetically modified organism (“GMO”) technology in order to process sugarcane more efficiently.

 

 	•	 	
Engaging in recycling activities that take into account the lifecycle (development, manufacture, use, disposal) of a vehicle. Research and development focuses primarily on (1) developing materials that are suitable for recycling and designs that facilitate dismantling parts, and (2) research on effective dismantling technology of end-of-life vehicles and use of recycle materials.

Toyota’s work in the area of vehicle safety is focused on the development of technologies designed to prevent accidents in the first instance, as well as the development of technologies that protect passengers and reduce the damage on impact in the event of an accident. Safety technologies in development include:

 

 	•	 	
research on protecting diverse passengers, including senior citizens,

 

 	•	 	
autonomous driving support systems, including pre-collision system, and

 

 	•	 	
data exchange driving-support systems using advanced communication technologies.

To expand the frontiers of safety technology in automobiles, Toyota completed in 1995 its first prototype Advanced Safety Vehicle, the ASV-1. The ASV-2, which was introduced in 2000, incorporates emerging technologies, such as an autonomous safety support system that uses CCD stereo cameras to recognize obstacles in traffic lanes and an infrastructure-harmonized safety support system to warn the driver of pedestrian crossings. In 2002, Toyota conducted road testing of the ASV-3, a prototype based on further improved infrastructure-harmonized system. With the February 2003 introduction of the Harrier in Japan, Toyota became the first car manufacturer to implement a pre-collision system in its automobiles. This advanced system utilizes pre-collision

 

91

Table of Contents
sensors that use millimeter wave radar and cameras to detect objects presenting hazards, and in addition to alerting the driver to the danger of potential collisions, this system employs a brake assist mechanism that utilizes power-assisted braking to minimize the speed on impact, and automatically applies the vehicle’s brakes when a collision is determined to be inevitable. In February 2004, Toyota introduced the pre-collision system for the first time in the United States by equipping the LS430 with the above features.

In September 2006, at the time of introduction of LS460 in Japan, Toyota established the world’s first enhanced pre-collision system, which added functions to detect pedestrians in front, to support driver steering, and to react to vehicle collision.

In February 2008, Toyota developed the world’s first driver monitoring pre-collision system for the Crown sold in Japan, that monitors whether the driver’s eyes are open, in addition to the face monitor which monitors the direction in which the driver is facing.

In addition, in 2011, Toyota established the Collaborative Safety Research Center aimed at reducing the number of traffic accident related deaths through cooperation with various hospitals and universities in North America. Toyota is greatly fortifying its efforts toward product safety and quality, and this research center is part of these efforts. Established within the same research center is the Toyota Technical Center (“TTC”), which is the research and development center of Toyota Motor Engineering & Manufacturing North America, Inc. At the TTC, Toyota’s technicians based in Japan also take part in planning, and perform research focused on reducing the risk of distracted or impaired driving behaviors, as well as the protection of vulnerable demographics such as young children and the elderly. Toyota is also promoting the spread of safe vehicle technologies, and is implementing analyses of traffic accident and driver behavior data. Toyota is planning to invest in the amount of 50 million dollars over the next 5 years, starting from 2011.

In order to promote further streamlining of the global external decision-making process with respect to the development of vehicle safety technologies, Toyota appointed a Chief Safety Technology Officer (“CSTO”) in 2011, who will execute a general integration of safety technology within Toyota’s technology department.

Toyota’s product development program uses a series of methods which are generally intended to promote timely and appropriate responses to changing market demand. These methods include:

 

 	•	 	
optimizing and eliminating vehicle platforms,

 

 	•	 	
sharing parts and components among multiple vehicles,

 

 	•	 	
shortening the time for development and production preparation by the simultaneous study of design and production engineering processes, and

 

 	•	 	
using simulation technology for production design and evaluation.

Toyota carefully analyzes patents and the need for patents in each area of research to formulate more effective research and development strategies. Toyota identifies research and development projects in which it should acquire patents, and files relevant applications as necessary to help build a strong global patent portfolio.

In addition, Toyota wishes to contribute to sustainable mobility by promoting the spread of technologies with environmental and safety benefits. This is why Toyota takes an open stance to patent licensing, and grants licenses when appropriate terms are met. For example, in March 2004, Toyota and Ford Motor Company entered into licensing agreements for patents related to hybrid systems and emissions purification. In addition, in March 2010, Toyota and Mazda Motor Corporation entered into a licensing agreement regarding the supply of hybrid system technology.

Toyota does not consider any one group of patents or licenses to be so important that their expiration or termination would materially affect Toyota’s business. For a further discussion of Toyota’s intellectual property, see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Intellectual Property”.

 

92

Table of Contents
5.D TREND INFORMATION

For a discussion of the trends that affect Toyota’s business and operating results, see “— Operating Results” and “— Liquidity and Capital Resources”.

5.E OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS

Toyota uses its securitization program as part of its funding through special purpose entities for its financial services operations. Toyota is considered the primary beneficiary of these special purpose entities and therefore consolidates them. Toyota has not entered into any off-balance sheet securitization transactions during fiscal 2014.

Lending Commitments

Credit Facilities with Credit Card Holders

Toyota’s financial services operations issue credit cards to customers. As customary for credit card businesses, Toyota maintains credit facilities with holders of credit cards issued by Toyota. These facilities are used upon each holder’s requests up to the limits established on an individual holder’s basis. Although loans made to customers through these facilities are not secured, for the purposes of minimizing credit risks and of appropriately establishing credit limits for each individual credit card holder, Toyota employs its own risk management policy which includes an analysis of information provided by financial institutions in alliance with Toyota. Toyota periodically reviews and revises, as appropriate, these credit limits. Outstanding credit facilities with credit card holders were ¥234.2 billion as of March 31, 2014.

Credit Facilities with Dealers

Toyota’s financial services operations maintain credit facilities with dealers. These credit facilities may be used for business acquisitions, facilities refurbishment, real estate purchases, and working capital requirements. These loans are typically collateralized with liens on real estate, vehicle inventory, and/or other dealership assets, as appropriate. Toyota obtains a personal guarantee from the dealer or corporate guarantee from the dealership when deemed prudent. Although the loans are typically collateralized or guaranteed, the value of the underlying collateral or guarantees may not be sufficient to cover Toyota’s exposure under such agreements. Toyota prices the credit facilities according to the risks assumed in entering into the credit facility. Toyota’s financial services operations also provide financing to various multi-franchise dealer organizations, referred to as dealer groups, often as part of a lending consortium, for wholesale inventory financing, business acquisitions, facilities refurbishment, real estate purchases, and working capital requirements. Toyota’s outstanding credit facilities with dealers totaled ¥2,014.4 billion as of March 31, 2014.

Guarantees

Toyota enters into certain guarantee contracts with its dealers to guarantee customers’ payments of their installment payables that arise from installment contracts between customers and Toyota dealers, as and when requested by Toyota dealers. Guarantee periods are set to match the maturity of installment payments, and as of March 31, 2014, ranged from one month to 35 years. However, they are generally shorter than the useful lives of products sold. Toyota is required to execute its guarantee primarily when customers are unable to make required payments.

The maximum potential amount of future payments as of March 31, 2014 is ¥2,097.1 billion. Liabilities for these guarantees of ¥6.4 billion have been provided as of March 31, 2014. Under these guarantee contracts, Toyota is entitled to recover any amounts paid by it from the customers whose obligations it guaranteed.
Toyota offers several basic models for the global minivan market. Its largest minivan, the Alphard was remodeled in May 2008 in Japan at the same time that the Vellfire was introduced. In addition, the Corolla Verso was introduced in December 2008 in Europe, and the Wish was remodeled in April 2009 and the Noah/Voxy was remodeled in January 2014 in Japan. Toyota’s other minivan models include, in Japan, the Estima, the Sienta, the Isis and, in North America, the Sienna.

Trucks and Buses

Toyota’s product lineup includes trucks (including vans) up to a gross vehicle weight of five tons and micro-buses, which are sold in Japan and in overseas markets. Trucks and buses are also manufactured and sold by Hino, a subsidiary of Toyota. Hino’s product lineup includes large trucks with a gross vehicle weight of over eleven tons, medium trucks with a gross vehicle weight of between five and eleven tons, and small trucks with a gross vehicle weight of up to five tons. As of fiscal 2014, Hino maintains a large share of the large truck market in Japan. Hino’s bus lineup includes medium to large buses used primarily as tour buses and public buses, small buses and micro-buses. Toyota and Hino maintain a large share of the small bus (including micro-buses) market in Japan.