With the future program TOGETHER – Strategy 2025
announced in 2016, we aim to make the Volkswagen Group
more focused, efficient, innovative, customer-oriented and
sustainable, and systematically geared towards generating
profitable growth. The program creates the framework and
lays the cornerstones for us to achieve our vision of being
one of the world’s leading providers of sustainable mobility.
The time horizon until 2025 shows that our thoughts
and actions are long-term and future-oriented. The term
TOGETHER describes the mindset that will be even more vital
to the Volkswagen Group’s long-term success going forward.
Our intention with the new Group strategy is for everyone in
the Volkswagen Group to join us in producing exciting vehicles and forward-looking, tailor-made mobility solutions that
will continue to inspire our customers, meeting their diverse
needs with a portfolio of strong brands. Every day, we actively
assume and exercise responsibility in relation to the environment, safety and society, and we wish to be a role model in
these areas. Integrity, reliability, quality and passion thus
form the basis for our work. In this way, we will aim for
technological leadership in the industry, ensure our competitive profitability and remain an excellent, reliable and
secure employer at the same time.
The Code of Collaboration formulated as part of the
future program is the foundation on which the Group
strategy rests. This Code describes how collaboration is to
take place within the Group and between individuals in their
day-to-day work. Its core values are encapsulated in the terms
“genuine”, “straightforward”, “open-minded”, “as equals” and
“united”.
Goals and Strategies
We are striving for lasting success in tomorrow’s world of mobility and intend to be one of the
world’s leading providers of sustainable mobility. This is the reason we have anchored the
future program TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 in the Group.
FUTURE PROGRAM TOGETHER – STRATEGY 2025
Sustainable
growth
Excellent
employer Competitive
protability
Role model for
environment, safety
and integrity
Excited
customers
52 Goals and Strategies Group Management Report
FOUR BUILDING BLOCKS OF THE FUTURE PROGRAM
TOGETHER – STRATEGY 2025
Our Group strategy comprises a raft of far-reaching strategic
decisions and specific initiatives aimed at safeguarding the
long-term future and generating profitable growth. It is
composed of four building blocks which cover strategic
Group initiatives. We regularly review the progress of these
initiatives so as to analyze the significance, suitability and
target achievement of the measures defined. We are thus able
to adjust the Group initiatives specifically according to the
dynamic changes occurring within our Company.
The first of these is the transformation of the core automotive business. Developing, building and selling vehicles
will remain essential for the Volkswagen Group going forward. However, there will be far-reaching and lasting changes
to this business in the future. That is the reason why we are
comprehensively restructuring our core business to face this
new era of mobility.
The second key building block in our Group strategy is
establishing a new mobility solutions business. In this business, we are developing innovative and efficient, attractive
yet profitable mobility services that are tailored to customer
requirements with the goal of being one of the leading
providers in this growth market in the future.
With the third key building block, we are intensifying our
traditionally excellent innovative strength and placing it on
an even broader footing. This is necessary both for the transformation of our core business and for the establishment
of the new mobility solutions business. To this end, we are
pushing ahead with the digital transformation in all parts of
the Company.
Becoming one of the world’s leading providers of sustainable mobility calls for substantial capital expenditure.
This will be financed in particular through efficiency gains
along the entire value chain – from product development and
procurement through to production and distribution as well
as in the central supporting areas. Additional funds for future
investments can also be generated by optimizing the existing
portfolio of brands and equity investments. Through the
fourth key building block of the Group strategy we will
safeguard the financing of the Volkswagen Group and place it
on a solid basis.
GOALS AND KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS OF THE GROUP’S
STRATEGY
The strategic initiatives describe how we intend to achieve
our vision of being one of the world’s leading providers of
sustainable mobility. For this purpose, we have defined four
target dimensions – excited customers, excellent employer,
role model for the environment, safety and integrity, and
competitive profitability – which are designed to help us
grow sustainably.
Although these target dimensions apply throughout the
Group, the strategic KPIs that we will use in the future to
measure how well we have implemented our Group strategy,
depend on the respective business model. After all, the busi-

BUILDING BLOCKS AND STRATEGIC GROUP INITIATIVES
TRANSFORM
CORE BUSINESS
BUILD
MOBILITY SOLUTIONS
BUSINESS
· Establish mobility
 solutions business
· Develop and expand
 attractive and protable
 smart mobility oering
· Improve
 operational excellence
· Optimize
 business portfolio
· Integrate strategy
 and planning process
SECURE
FUNDING
STRENGTHEN
INNOVATION POWER
· Drive digital transformation
· Create organization 4.0
· Sharpen positioning of brands
· Develop successful vehicle and drivetrain portfolio
· Partner with regional players to win in economy segment
· Streamline modular toolkits
· Implement model line organization
· Realign “Components” business
· Develop battery technology as new core competency
· Develop self-driving system for autonomous vehicles and articial intelligence
· Develop best-in-class user experience across brands and customer touchpoints
Group Management Report Goals and Strategies 53
ness model for our passenger car-producing brands is
different from that for trucks and buses and also from that of
our Power Engineering Business Area and our services
business.
In the following, we describe the Group’s strategic goals
attached to these target dimensions.
The strategic KPIs of the competitive profitability target
dimension have been defined and anchored uniformly in the
Group. As the new Group strategy has yet to be specified in
detail, the content of some strategic KPIs in the other target
dimensions is still being determined. The relevance of the
KPIs is reviewed at Group level and their focus continuously
monitored and adjusted as necessary. We report on the
defined nonfinancial strategic KPIs in the “Corporate
Governance Report” and “Sustainable Value Enhancement”
sections.
Target dimension: excited customers
This target dimension focuses on the diverse needs of our
customers and on tailor-made mobility solutions. We aspire
to exceed our customers’ expectations, generating maximum
benefit for them. That calls not only for the best products, the
most efficient solutions and the best service, but also for
flawless quality and an outstanding image. We want to excite
our existing customers, win over new ones and retain their
loyalty in the long term – because only loyal and faithful
customers will recommend us to others.
The strategic KPIs consist of the conquest rate and KPIs
pertaining to loyalty, customer satisfaction and quality.
Target dimension: excellent employer
Skilled and dedicated employees are one of the keys to
sustainable success. We wish to promote their satisfaction
and motivation by means of equal opportunities, an
attractive and modern working environment, and a forwardlooking organization of work. Exemplary leadership and
corporate culture forms the foundation for this, enabling us
to retain our core workforce and attract new talent.
The strategic KPIs of this target dimension cover internal
employer attractiveness determined by means of the opinion
survey, external employer attractiveness, an external
employer ranking as well as a KPI pertaining to cross-brand
exchange and rotation and the diversity index.
Target dimension: role model for environment, safety and integrity
Every day, we at the Volkswagen Group assume and exercise
responsibility in relation to the environment, safety and
society. This is reflected in our thoughts and actions and in all
our decisions in equal measure.
We pay particular attention to the use of resources and
the emissions of our product portfolio as well as those of our
sites and plants, with the goal of continuously improving our
carbon footprint and lowering pollutant emissions. Through
innovations and outstanding quality, we aim for maximum
product safety.
The most important principles in this process include
compliance with laws and regulations, the establishment of
secure processes, and dealing openly with mistakes so that
they can be avoided or rectified in the future. In terms of
integrity, Volkswagen aims to become a role model for a
modern, transparent and successful enterprise.
The strategic KPIs of this target dimension include the
decarbonization index and KPIs pertaining to emissions
figures, compliance, a culture of dealing openly with mistakes, and integrity.
Target dimension: competitive profitability
Investors judge us by whether we are able to meet our
obligations as regards interest payments and debt repayments. As equity holders, they expect appropriate dividends
and a long-term increase in the value of their shares.
We make investments with a view to achieving profitable
growth and strengthening our competitiveness, thus keeping
the Volkswagen Group on a firm footing and ensuring it
remains an attractive investment option.
The goals we have set ourselves are operational excellence
in all business processes and becoming the benchmark for
the entire industry.
The strategic KPIs are operationalized for internal management purposes: target and actual data are derived from
Volkswagen Group figures.
STRATEGIC KPIS: COMPETITIVE PROFITABILITY
2015 2025
Operating return on sales1 6.0% 7 to 8%
Research and development ratio
(R&D ratio) in the Automotive
Division 7.4% ~6%
Capex/sales revenue in the
Automotive Division 6.9% ~6%
Net cash flow in the
Automotive Division €8,887 million >€10 billion
Payout ratio negative 30%
Net liquidity in the Automotive
Division
€24,522 million,
11.5%
~10% of
consolidated
sales revenue
Return on investment (ROI) in the
Automotive Division –0.2% >15%
1 2015 before special items. 
54 Internal Management System and Key Performance Indicators Group Management Report
The Volkswagen Group’s performance and success can be
measured by both financial and nonfinancial key performance indicators. With the Operational Excellence Group
initiative, we aim to improve these indicators throughout all
areas and along the entire value chain.
In the following, we first describe the internal management process and then explain the Volkswagen Group’s core
performance indicators.
INTERNAL MANAGEMENT PROCESS IN THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP
The Integrate Strategy and Planning Process Group initiative
is focused on continuity and even closer dovetailing of the
Group and brand strategies with the operational planning
process. This enhances transparency when it comes to the
financial assessment and the evaluation of directional decisions. The operational medium-term planning that is conducted once a year and generally covers a period of five years
is incorporated into the strategic planning as a key management element of the Group.
Medium-term planning forms the core of our operational
planning and is used to formulate and safeguard the
requirements for realizing strategic projects designed to meet
Group targets in both technical and economic terms – and
particularly in relation to earnings, cash flow and liquidity
effects. In addition, it is used to coordinate all business areas
with respect to the strategic action areas concerned: functions/processes, products and markets.
When planning the Company’s future, the individual planning components are determined on the basis of the timescale involved:
> the long-term unit sales plan, which sets out market and
segment growth and then derives the Volkswagen Group’s
delivery volumes from them,
> the product program as the strategic, long-term factor
determining corporate policy,
> capacity and utilization planning for the individual sites.
The coordinated results of the upstream planning processes
are used as the basis for the medium-term financial planning:
the Group’s financial planning, including the brands and
business fields, comprises the income statement, cash flow
and balance sheet planning, profitability and liquidity, as well
as the upfront investments needed for alternative products
and the implementation of strategic options. The first year of
the medium-term planning period is fixed and a budget
drawn up for the individual months. This is planned in detail
down to the level of the operating cost centers.
The budget is reviewed each month throughout the year
Group Management Report Internal Management System and Key Performance Indicators 55
CORE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS IN THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP
The Volkswagen Group’s internal management system is
based on nine core performance indicators, which are derived
from our strategic goals:
> Deliveries to customers
> Sales revenue
> Operating result
> Operating return on sales
> Research and development ratio (R&D ratio) in the Automotive Division
> Capex/sales revenue in the Automotive Division
> Net cash flow in the Automotive Division
> Net liquidity in the Automotive Division
> Return on investment (ROI) in the Automotive Division
Deliveries to customers are defined as handovers of new
vehicles to the end customer. This figure shows the popularity of our products and is the measure we use to determine
our competitive position in the various markets. Deliveries
are closely related to our targets of exciting our customers,
being a role model in terms of the environment, safety and
integrity, and being an excellent employer. One of the most
important prerequisites for the Company’s long-term success
is a strong brand portfolio that – on the basis of outstanding
quality – offers tailor-made mobility solutions with safe,
resource-efficient vehicles, thus meeting the diverse needs of
customers. Demand for our products guarantees not only
unit sales and production, but also full utilization of our sites
and the jobs of our employees. The goals we are striving for
cannot be achieved without a skilled, dedicated workforce
and a consensus on shared values.
Sales revenue, which does not include the figures for our
equity-accounted Chinese joint ventures, reflects our market
success in financial terms. Following adjustment for our use
of resources, the operating result reflects the Company’s
actual business activity and documents the economic success
of our core business. The operating return on sales is the ratio
of the operating result to sales revenue.
The research and development ratio (R&D ratio) in the
Automotive Division shows total research and development
costs in relation to sales revenue. Research and development
costs comprise a range of expenses, from futurology through
to the development of marketable products. Particular emphasis is placed on the environmentally friendly orientation of
our product portfolio, digitalization and new technologies.
The R&D ratio underscores the efforts made to ensure the

Company’s future viability: the goal of competitive profitability geared to sustainable growth.
The ratio of capex (investments in property, plant and
equipment, investment property and intangible assets,
excluding capitalized development costs) to sales revenue in
the Automotive Division reflects both our innovative power
and our future competitiveness. It shows our capital expenditure – largely for modernizing, expanding and digitalizing
our product range and for environmentally friendly
drivetrains, as well as for adjusting production capacities and
improving production processes – in relation to the Automotive Division’s sales revenue.
Net cash flow in the Automotive Division represents the
excess funds from operating activities available for dividend
payments, for example. It is calculated as cash flows from
operating activities less cash flows from investing activities
attributable to operating activities.
Net liquidity in the Automotive Division is the total of
cash, cash equivalents, securities, loans and time deposits not
financed by third-party borrowings. To safeguard our business activities, we have formulated the strategic target that
net liquidity in the Automotive Division should amount to
approximately 10% of the consolidated sales revenue.
We use the return on investment (ROI) to calculate the
return on invested capital for a particular period in the Automotive Division, including the Chinese joint ventures on a
proportionate basis, by calculating the ratio of the operating
result after tax to average invested capital. If the return on
investment (ROI) exceeds the market cost of capital, the value
of the Company has increased. This is how we measure the
financial success of our brands, locations and vehicle
projects.
You can find information on and explanations of the sales
figures and the Volkswagen Group’s financial key performance indicators on pages 101 to 107 and on pages 114 to
128, respectively.
Detailed descriptions of our activities and additional
nonfinancial key performance indicators in the areas of sustainability, research and development, procurement, production, sales and marketing, quality assurance, employees,
information technology and the environment can be found
in the chapter entitled “Sustainable Value Enhancement”
beginning on page 133 of this annual report. Nonfinancial
key performance indicators related to compliance are
described in the “Corporate Governance Report” on page 65. 
56 Structure and Business Activities Group Management Report
OUTLINE OF THE LEGAL STRUCTURE OF THE GROUP
Volkswagen AG is the parent company of the Volkswagen
Group. It develops vehicles and components for the Group’s
brands, but also produces and sells vehicles, in particular
passenger cars and light commercial vehicles for the Volkswagen Passenger Cars and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles
brands. In its capacity as parent company, Volkswagen AG
holds indirect or direct interests in AUDI AG, SEAT S.A.,
ŠKODA AUTO a.s., Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG, Scania AB,
MAN SE, Volkswagen Financial Services AG, Volkswagen Bank
GmbH and a large number of other companies in Germany
and abroad. More detailed disclosures are contained in
the list of shareholdings in accordance with sections 285 and
313 of the Handelsgesetzbuch (HGB – German Commercial
Code), which can be accessed at www.volkswagenag.com/en/
InvestorRelations.html and is part of the annual financial
statements.
Volkswagen AG is a vertically integrated energy supply
company as defined by section 3 no. 38 of the Energiewirtschaftsgesetz (EnWG – German Energy Industry Act) and
is therefore subject to the provisions of the EnWG. In the electricity sector, Volkswagen AG generates, sells and distributes
electricity together with a Group subsidiary.
Volkswagen AG’s Board of Management is the ultimate
body responsible for managing the Group. The Supervisory
Board appoints, monitors and advises the Board of Management; it is consulted directly on decisions that are of fundamental significance for the Company.
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE GROUP
The Volkswagen Group is one of the leading multibrand
groups in the automotive industry. The Company’s business
activities comprise the Automotive and Financial Services
divisions. All brands within the Automotive Division – with
the exception of the Volkswagen Passenger Cars and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles brands – are independent legal
entities.
The Automotive Division comprises the Passenger Cars,
Commercial Vehicles and Power Engineering business areas.
The Passenger Cars Business Area essentially consolidates the
Volkswagen Group’s passenger car brands. Activities focus on
the development of vehicles and engines, the production and
sale of passenger cars, and the genuine parts business. The
product portfolio ranges from fuel-efficient compact cars to
luxury vehicles and also includes motorcycles, and will
gradually be supplemented by mobility solutions.
The Commercial Vehicles Business Area primarily comprises the development, production and sale of light commercial vehicles, trucks and buses from the Volkswagen
Commercial Vehicles, Scania and MAN brands, the corresponding genuine parts business and related services. The
collaboration between the MAN and Scania commercial
vehicle brands is coordinated within the TRATON GROUP. The
commercial vehicles portfolio ranges from pickups to heavy
trucks and buses.
The Power Engineering Business Area combines the largebore diesel engines, turbomachinery, special gear units,
propulsion components and testing systems businesses.
The activities of the Financial Services Division comprise
dealer and customer financing, vehicle leasing, direct banking
and insurance activities, as well as fleet management and
mobility offerings.
With its brands, the Volkswagen Group is present in all
relevant markets around the world. The Group’s key sales
markets currently include Western Europe, China, the USA,
Brazil, Russia and Mexico.
Volkswagen AG and the Volkswagen Group are managed
by the Volkswagen AG Board of Management in accordance
with the Volkswagen AG Articles of Association and the rules
of procedure for Volkswagen AG’s Board of Management
issued by the Supervisory Board.

Structure and Business Activities
This chapter describes the legal and organizational structure of the Volkswagen Group
and explains the material changes in 2018 with respect to equity investments. 
Group Management Report Structure and Business Activities 57
To further enhance its leadership and management model,
the Volkswagen Group introduced an additional internal
operational structure in spring 2018. Volkswagen is convinced that this will allow better use of existing competences
and economies of scale, make it possible to leverage synergies
more systematically and accelerate decision making.
In addition to the Finance & IT, Human Resources and
Integrity and Legal Affairs divisions, the Volkswagen Group
collaborates across six operating units and the China region,
these being the “Volume”, “Premium”, “Sport & Luxury”,
“Truck & Bus” brand groups, as well as the Components &
Procurement and Financial Services operating units. The
“Volume” brand group comprises the Volkswagen Passenger
Cars, SEAT, ŠKODA and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles
brands. The Audi, Lamborghini and Ducati brands are
brought together in the “Premium” brand group. “Sport &
Luxury” is comprised of the Porsche, Bentley and Bugatti
brands. The “Truck & Bus” brand group is the umbrella for
the Scania and MAN brands. Components & Procurement will
function as one unit spanning all of the brands and supporting them. The Financial Services business has been
combined into a single unit.
 This prepares the Volkswagen Group for a management
structure that is simpler, leaner and more effective, and
strengthens the brands, giving them more autonomy. In line
with the principle of subsidiarity, decisions will be taken at
the lowest competent level, close to business operations.
At the same time, spreading the Group’s management
duties more broadly means that responsibility is assigned
more clearly and definitively. Every member of the Board of
Management has assumed additional higher-level duties for
the Group. At the same time, the members of the Board of
Management of Volkswagen AG have responsibility for a
brand group or operating unit, improving collaboration
between the brands and the Group as a whole and ensuring
that management of the Group is a shared undertaking.
Each brand in the Volkswagen Group is managed by a
brand board of management, which ensures its independent
and self-contained development and business operations. To
the extent permitted by law, the board adheres to the Group
targets and requirements laid down by the Board of
Management of Volkswagen AG, as well as with the agreements in the brand groups. This allows Group-wide interests
to be pursued, while at the same time safeguarding and
reinforcing each brand’s specific characteristics. Matters that
are of importance to the Group as a whole are submitted to
the Group Board of Management in order to reach agreement
between the parties involved, to the extent permitted by law.
The rights and obligations of the statutory bodies of the
relevant brand company remain unaffected.
The companies of the Volkswagen Group are managed by
their respective managements on their own responsibility. In
addition to the interests of their own companies, the
management of each individual company takes into account
the interests of the Group, the relevant brand group and the
individual brands in accordance with the framework laid
down by law.
At Group level, committees also address key strategic
issues, for example relating to product planning, investments, risks management and management issues. The
portfolio of these committees and the regulation landscape
at Group level was revised in the reporting year and, in the
course of this, a committee was established to manage the
technology strategy. This has reduced complexity and reinforced governance within the Group.
Within our future program TOGETHER – Strategy 2025,
the Organization 4.0 Group initiative is also supporting the
Company’s transformation. The aim of this initiative is to
connect activities across divisions, initiate new organizational approaches and anchor these in the Group for the long
term. This will not only enable but actively create holistic
stimulus for innovation, entrepreneurship and change.
MATERIAL CHANGES IN EQUITY INVESTMENTS
The control and profit and loss transfer agreement between
MAN SE, as the controlled company, and TRATON SE (at that
time Volkswagen Truck & Bus AG), a wholly owned subsidiary
of Volkswagen AG, as the controlling company, came into
force upon its entry in the commercial register on July 16,
2013. The conclusion of the control and profit and loss
transfer agreement replaced, the group based on the de facto
exercise of management control with a contractual group,
permitting considerably more efficient and less bureaucratic
cooperation between the MAN Group and the rest of the
Volkswagen Group. In the summer of 2018, the Higher
Regional Court in Munich made a final decision in the award
proceedings regarding the appropriateness of the cash
settlement and the right to compensation for the noncontrolling interest shareholders of MAN SE, ruling that the
cash settlement amount set out in the contract should be
increased to €90.29 per share and the annual compensation
to €5.47 gross per share. Following the entry of the final
decisions in the commercial register in August 2018, the
noncontrolling interest shareholders were entitled to tender
their shares in accordance with section 305 of the Aktiengesetz (AktG – German Stock Corporation Act) within a twomonth period. The decision in the award proceedings
resulted in a significant increase in the annual compensation
to be paid to noncontrolling interest shareholders of MAN SE.
In the opinion of the Board of Management at TRATON SE (at
 
58 Structure and Business Activities Group Management Report
that time TRATON AG), this was no longer proportionate to
the profit transfer from MAN SE and other benefits stipulated
in the control and profit and loss transfer agreement;
TRATON SE therefore exercised its right to extraordinary
termination in accordance with section 304(4) of the German
Stock Corporation Act on August 22, 2018 and terminated the
control and profit and loss transfer agreement effective
January 1, 2019. As of year-end 2018, TRATON SE held
87.04 (75.73)% of the ordinary shares and 83.05 (46.95)% of
the preferred shares in MAN SE. Following the announcement
of the termination of the control and profit and loss transfer
agreement and the recording thereof in the commercial
register on January 3, 2019, the noncontrolling shareholders
of MAN SE once again had the right to tender their shares to
TRATON SE, pursuant to the provisions of the control and
profit and loss transfer agreement, within a two-month
period at a cash settlement price of €90.29.
With the Optimize business portfolio Group initiative, the
Board of Management intends to ensure the Volkswagen
Group’s competitiveness and financial performance as a
forward-looking mobility provider by focusing on its core
business. To this end, we are continuously monitoring and
analyzing our portfolio and can respond in a timely manner
by making any necessary purchases or sales.
LEGAL FACTORS INFLUENCING BUSINESS
Like other international companies, the business of Volkswagen companies is affected by numerous laws in Germany
and abroad. In particular, there are legal requirements
relating to development, products, production and distribution, as well as supervisory, data protection, financial, company, commercial, capital market, anti-trust and tax regulations and regulations relating to labor, banking, state aid,
energy, environmental and insurance law. 
Automobile markets Worldwide registrations of passenger cars and light commercial vehicles grew by 3.3 % to 82.4 million units. The two largest automobile markets, the USA and China, were once again the mainstays driving this outcome. Registration figures in China, for instance, increased by 8.9 % to 20.5 million units. Although this number points to a weaker performance than one year earlier, the Chinese market nevertheless increased the gap between itself and the US market, which grew by 5.7 % to 17.5 million units. Automobile markets in Europe picked up where they had left off the previous year, growing by 9.2 % (14.2 million units) during the period under report. Excluding registrations in Germany, the European market fared slightly better with a 10.3 % increase to 11.0 million units. The German automobile market grew by 5.6 % to 3.2 million units and therefore accounted for nearly a quarter of all new registrations in Europe (22.6 %). France (1.9 million units; + 6.8 %) and Italy (1.6 million units; + 15.5 %) both saw robust growth, which also contributed to the recovery. Europe’s growth was also helped by a repeated dynamic performance in Spain (1.0 million units; + 20.9 %). Registrations in the United Kingdom were 6.3 % higher at 2.6 million units. Japan’s automobile market contracted in 2015, with new registrations falling and totalling only 4.9 million units ( – 9.8 %). Automobile markets in major emerging economies continued to suffer from recession in 2015. The Russian market shrank by more than one-third (1.5 million units; – 36.0 %) and the Brazilian market by a good quarter (2.5 million units; – 25.7 %). Research and development are absolutely essential for the BMW Group to maintain competitiveness as a premium manufacturer. As part of the Efficient Dynamics strategy, the Group works continually on additionally improving energy efficiency and reducing the emissions of the entire range of automobiles and motorcycles it sells. Under the catchword “Connected Drive”, the BMW Group works on the connectivity of driver, vehicle and the outside world. Both concepts embrace forwardlooking technologies in vehicles and are testimony to the BMW Group’s innovative strength. Going forward, the BMW Group will no doubt continue to set standards in the field of connectivity on the roads. At 31 December 2015, a total of 12,669 people at 13 locations in five countries worldwide were working in the BMW Group’s research and development network to achieve this end. Expenditure for research and development rose by 13.2 % to €5,169 million, mostly for projects aimed at securing the Group’s future (2014: €4,566 million). The research and development ratio stood at 5.6 % and therefore at a similar level to the previous year (2014: 5.7 %). The ratio of capitalised development costs to total research and development expenditure for the period (capitalisation ratio) was 39.9 % (2014: 32.8 %). Amortisation of capitalised development costs totalled €1,166 million (2014: €1,068 million; + 9.2 %). Further information on research and development expenditure is provided in the section “Report on Economic Position” (Results of Operations) and in note 10 to the Group Financial Statements. Given the pace of technological innovation, cooperation arrangements in the field of research and development are commonplace in the automotive industry. The BMW Group also enters into cooperation agreements with selected partners. The aim of these research and development activities, which may also include cross-sector input, is to help find innovative solutions for individual mobility. The focus is currently on next-generation technologies, such as digitalisation and alternative drive systems. Broadly diversified drive system research In the course of 2015, the Group integrated hybrid technologies in further BMW brand models. In parallel, engineers continued development work on highly-efficient combustion engines. In the medium and long term, the BMW Group is also developing a fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV). With these varying drive systems, the BMW Group is well prepared for the challenges of the future and will also be able to flexibly cater to both the requirements of customers and the standards dictated by RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT Development of credit loss ratio in % 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 11 12 13 14 15 0.49 0.48 0.46 0.50 0.37 39 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT legislators going forward. With efficient petrol- and diesel-driven engines, plug-in hybrid systems, batterypowered drives and also, in future, hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicles, the BMW Group is looking to provide suitable technologies for every segment and requirement. In a prototype presented in 2015, a direct water injection system was used for turbocharged petrol engines for the first time. This innovative technology greatly reduces the temperature in the combustion process, thereby raising the efficiency factor. Moreover, the technology reduces fuel consumption during higher performance requirements. The newly developed BMW 2 Series Active Tourer Plug-in Hybrid is fitted with a 3-cylinder front-wheel-drive petrol engine, a high-voltage generator installed at the front and an electric motor that transfers power to the rear wheels. The result is a road-linked all-wheel-drive system unique in its segment. The hydrogen fuel cell electric drive system is destined to become an integrated component of the Group’s Effi cient Dynamics strategy. The diversity of drive technologies that can be flexibly coordinated to suit varying vehicle concepts, customer requirements and statutory framework conditions on international markets is therefore growing. The hydrogen fuel cell electric drive system, which converts hydrogen to electricity and steam, enables locally emissions-free, electrically powered driving with the dynamic flair typical for the BMW brand, high suitability for covering long distances, and short refuelling times, therefore representing a further key option in the range of BMW eDrive technologies. The BMW Group has been conducting research and development work in the field of hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicles for over 15 years. Highly and fully automated driving Assistance systems increase both safety and convenience levels while driving, although the degree of driver support differs. Fully automated assistance systems offer the highest degree of automation. Fully automated functions are those which no longer need to be monitored by the driver. As with the fully automated Remote Valet Parking Assistant, the driver does not even need to be in the vehicle. Highly automated systems are the stage before fully automated systems and do not need to be constantly monitored by the driver. They control both the longitudinal (driving forwards and backwards) and latitudinal (driving to the left or right by steering) movements of the vehicle. By contrast, although semi-automated systems are capable of controlling both the longitudinal and latitudinal movements of the vehicle (e.g. congestion assistant), they need to be continually monitored by the driver. Assisted systems (such as ACC) on the other hand, only support the driver when driving forwards or steering left or right. At the Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas in 2015, the BMW Group presented a BMW i3 research vehicle that demonstrated how parking spaces can be found in a multi-storey car park with a fully automated, driverless vehicle. The advantages are less vehicle damage and far better use of the available parking space. Laser scanners installed on the vehicle create an exact picture of the surroundings. The Remote Valet Parking Assistant links this information with the digital floor plan of the car park and, based on this data, is capable of automatically driving the vehicle to a free space and parking it. When the driver wishes to leave again, he or she calls the vehicle (via smartwatch, for example) and it automatically drives to the car park exit, ready to continue to its next destination, without having to rely on a GPS signal. As the research vehicle is fitted not only with its own laser sensors but also with its own computers and the required algorithms, it can calculate its exact position in the car park, perfectly monitor its surroundings and independently navigate, fully automatically. Multi-storey car parks do not need to be elaborately equipped with special infrastructure. The new BMW 7 Series can already park straight in and out of a parking space via remote control. The fully automated Parking Assistant demonstrated in the prototype is a logical continuation of this innovative technological progress. At the CES, a further research vehicle was presented featuring a fully automated system that warns the driver in the event of an imminent collision and automatically triggers a braking manoeuvre precise to the last centimetre if required. Up to a certain speed, the test vehicle makes it practically impossible for the driver to collide with another obstacle. In order to achieve this feat, cameras, radar and laser sensors record the entire surroundings of the vehicle. Collision-free driving forms the basis for taking a crucial step towards achieving accident-free individual mobility and for that reason the BMW Group has been working for many years to implement this vision. Assistance systems such as Active Cruise Control with a stop-and-go feature (ACC) are already built into the latest BMW models and react to vehicles driving ahead. They are radar- and camera-based and apply the brakes, even until the vehicle comes to a halt if necessary. 40 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 29 Automotive Segment 35 Motorcycles Segment 36 Financial Services Segment 38 Research and Development 41 Purchasing 42 Sales and Marketing 44 Workforce 45 Sustainability 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets MINI presents Augmented Reality glasses The MINI Augmented Reality glasses presented at the Auto Shanghai 2015 supplement reality by superimposing the wearer’s field of vision with additional useful digital information on events in and around the vehicle, offering the user not only increased safety, but also greater convenience. Information relevant for driving, such as the current speed of the vehicle and the speed limit, are always displayed in the same position above the steering wheel, regardless of the driver’s head movements, ensuring that other road users or possible dangers are not hidden from view. Navigation arrows virtually projected onto the road assist the driver by ensuring that he or she continually concentrates on the surrounding traffic. If required, the glasses can also be adjusted to show places of interest or even free parking spaces en route. A camera installed on the side of the vehicle assists the driver when parking, enabling the driver to check both the obstacles in his or her line of vision and the distance to the kerb, which is displayed in their field of vision. The glasses also provide the driver with a virtual view through parts of the bodywork by making the A-pillar invisible, for instance, hence improving all-round vision. Innovations included in series vehicles In 2015, a new lighting technology known as organic light-emitting diodes, or OLEDs, were installed in a series model for the first time. OLEDs consume less electricity and therefore help further reduce CO2 emissions. Unlike the point-like light emitted by LEDs, OLEDs illuminate entire areas and are also smaller. The BMW Group has also installed numerous innovations for added driving convenience and assistance in the latest BMW 7 Series. For example, infotainment and communication features can be controlled from the back seat by means of a tablet. Self-configured or preconfigured functions can be controlled by hand gestures made within the vehicle. Using the new display key, the vehicle can be remotely and driverlessly manoeuvred in and out of tight parking spaces. Awards and prizes in 2015 The BMW Group won three “Golden Steering Wheels” during the year under report: for the BMW 7 Series in the luxury class, for the new BMW X1 among the mediumsized SUVs, and for the BMW 2 Series Gran Tourer in the family class, making BMW the most successful brand in this year’s Golden Steering Wheel competition. In the “International Engine of the Year Award”, the most prestigious engine competition worldwide, the BMW Group was winner in three different classes as well as overall winner. The new BMW TwinPower Turbo 3-cylinder petrol engine, which powers the BMW i8, was winner in its class. The complete drivetrain of the BMW i8 also won the “best new engine” award. The successful combination of electric motor and petrol engine also won the overall award. Winner in the 2.5- to 3.0-litre category was the M TwinPower Turbo in-line 6-cylinder petrol engine. The quadruple triumph for the BMW Group at the “International Engine of the Year Award” in 2015 additionally underscores the outstanding efficiency of the Efficient Dynamics technology package, which, since 2007, has enabled the BMW Group to continually increase the sheer driving pleasure and reduce consumption and emission levels at the same time. 41 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT Ideal balance between quality, innovation, flexibility and costs The underlying objective of the BMW Group’s purchasing, quality assurance and component production functions is to achieve the ideal balance between quality, innovation, flexible supply structures and competitive costs. At all levels – production materials, raw materials, services and capital goods – arrangements are in place to ensure that the BMW Group is able to react flexibly to fluctuations in demand, especially when operating within a volatile market environment. Increasing pace of globalisation Increased globalisation, the interconnected nature of supplier markets and the widespread expansion of BMW Group sales and production operations around the world mean that the distribution of purchase volumes is changing continuously. In the coming years, the NAFTA region in particular will be the focus of growth, given the increasing volume of production planned for the Spartanburg plant in the USA. The addition of the BMW Group’s new plant in San Luis Potosí, Mexico, which is scheduled to open in 2019, will reinforce this shift. The BMW Group remains committed to achieving globally balanced growth in terms of sales, production and purchase volumes. This strategy also makes an important contribution to natural currency hedging. Investments safeguard productivity and technology leadership The Purchasing and Supplier Network is also responsible for component production throughout the BMW PURCHASING AND SUPPLIER NETWORK Group. Investing in state-of-the-art manufacturing facilities and efficient structures increases the competitiveness of in-house component production. During the finan cial year under report, the cornerstone was laid for a new lightweight design centre at the BMW Group’s component production plant in Landshut. When completed, the centre will house facilities for some 160 engineers, who will research innovative materials, composite construction concepts and manufacturing processes for future vehicle generations. Fleet carbon emissions again reduced The development of sustainable products and services is an important aspect of the BMW Group’s business model. CO2 emissions levels are continually being reduced by incorporating Efficient Dynamics technologies in all of the Group’s vehicles. The scope of electrification within the fleet was further increased in 2015. These measures form the basis for complying with legally stipulated CO2 and fuel consumption limits moving forward. Between 1995 and 2015, the average amount of CO2 emitted by the Group’s three brands sold in Europe fell by 39.5 %. In 2015, the BMW Group’s fleet of new vehicles sold in Europe (EU-28) consumed an average of 4.7 litres of diesel per 100 km and 5.7 litres of petrol respectively. CO2 emissions averaged 127 grams per km. Clean production The efficient use of resources is an important aspect of running the business on a sustainable basis. When applied to all production-related processes, resource efficiency helps protect the environment and minimise costs. Since 2006, the consumption of resources and emissions per vehicle produced has been reduced by an average of 48.1 %. The individual figures are as follows: water consumption was slightly higher than one year earlier, largely due to increased cooling requirements caused by the hot summer in Germany (2014: 2.18 m³; + 2.8 %). At 0.45 m³, the volume of process wastewater per vehicle produced fell by 4.3 % (2014: 0.47 m³). The volume of non-recyclable production waste was further reduced to 4.00 kg per vehicle produced in 2015 (2014: 4.93 kg; – 18.9 %). Solvent emissions were successfully curtailed by 5.4 % to 1.22 kg per vehicle produced during 2015 (2014: 1.29 kg). Sustainability along the entire value-added chain Sustainability criteria are not only a vital aspect of inhouse production, they also play a major role in the selection and assessment of suppliers as well as in the field of transport logistics. The active management of sustainability risks along the supply chain mitigates compliance and image risks. With this in mind, the BMW Group has integrated a comprehensive system of sustainability management in its purchasing processes. The amount of energy required for transportation worldwide has continued to rise sharply in recent years. In order to keep CO2 emissions to an absolute minimum, the principle “production follows the market” is applied. In addition, the proportion of CO2-efficient modes of transport is being increased continually. In the year under report, for instance, the proportion of goods transported by air freight was significantly reduced. At 63.1 %, the proportion of new vehicles leaving BMW Group plants by rail was maintained at a high level (2014: 63.3 %). Competitive thanks to sustainable human resources policies In 2015, the BMW Group reinforced its position as one of the most attractive employers in the world. The prominent role played in the field of sustainability helps employees identify with the business and its products. This strong sense of identification is one of the factors contributing to the low attrition rate within the BMW Group, in turn helping to keep personnel recruitment expenses on the low side. Social engagement The BMW Group expended a total of €39.1 million (2014: €34.5 million) for social engagement in 2015, including €17.1 million (2014: €10.2 million) in the form of donations. The sharp increase in overall expenditure for social engagement compared to 2014 mainly reflects 48 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 29 Automotive Segment 35 Motorcycles Segment 36 Financial Services Segment 38 Research and Development 41 Purchasing 42 Sales and Marketing 44 Workforce 45 Sustainability 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets larger donations to the BMW Foundation Herbert Quandt and to the Eberhard von Kuenheim Foundation. Further information on the subject of sustainability within the BMW Group and the main topics is provided in the Sustainability Report, which can be accessed online at http:/ /www.bmwgroup.com. The Sustainable Value Report 2015 was drawn up in accordance with the Guidelines of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI G4), the most commonly used set of guidelines for sustainability reporting. The Sustainable Value Report 2015 is drawn up in accordance with the “comprehensive option” and is published at the same time as the Annual Report 2015. Political and global economic risks and opportunities As one of the world’s leading providers of premium products and services, the BMW Group faces a variety of major challenges. The world is changing at great speed and the resulting situations can give rise to risks on the one hand and opportunities on the other. Political and global economic risks Efficient individual mobility remains a key issue in many countries, in terms of the political regulation of both national environmental and industrial policymaking. Changing values in society call for innovative mobility and service solutions. The potential effect of unforeseeable disturbances in global economic interdependencies, increasingly fierce competition among established manufacturers and the emergence of new competitors is extremely difficult to predict. Shifts between volatile and stable economic phases, combined with the ready availability of information, also contribute to the uncertainty experienced by both markets and consumers. Although the US and UK economies may currently appear to be robust, the underlying macroeconomic risks – such as misallocations between asset price classes – have not become any less real compared to the previous year. The transition of the Chinese economy from an investment-driven to a consumerdriven market will entail slower growth rates and greater instability on financial markets. Apart from precipitating a decline in automobile sales, this process may also result in lower demand for commodities, which is most likely to hurt mainly emerging economies such as Brazil or Russia. A further drop in commodities prices could result in political and economic upheavals and hence lead to lower aggregate demand from the countries affected. The threat of distortions on the Chinese property, stock and banking markets on the one hand and/or an overly rapid hike in interest rates by the US Federal Bank pose considerable risks for global financial market stability. Unsolved structural problems in the eurozone or a renewed deterioration in the economic climate, for instance in Greece, could potentially dampen growth prospects for the BMW Group. At a political level, the current refugee crisis poses a threat to European integration and hopes of further expanding or at least maintaining a single economic and monetary area. Increasing political unrest, military conflicts, terrorist activities, natural disasters and/or pandemics could have a lasting negative impact on the global economy and international capital markets. The risks referred to above could curtail purchasing power in the countries and regions involved and, among other things, lead to reduced demand for the products and services offered by the BMW Group. The Group counters these risks primarily by internationalising its sales and production structures, in order to minimise the extent to which earnings are dependent on the outcomes of risks in individual countries and regions. The regular monitoring of macroeconomic data, which serve as the basis for sales volume and production planning, ensures that market changes are identified at an early stage. The extent of political and global economic risks is determined by analysing historical data and applying a cash-flow-atrisk approach. If risks from this category were to materialise, they could – due to sales volume fluctuations – have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. Overall, the risk amounts attached to political and global economic risks are classified as high. Political and global economic opportunities Economic conditions influence the operations, financial position and results of operations of the BMW Group. Should the global economy develop significantly better than reflected in the outlook, the revenues and earnings of the BMW Group could be significantly higher than originally predicted. A better-than-expected performance of the global economy with stronger growth in China, the introduction of economic stimulus programmes, the implementation of structural reforms within the eurozone and robust consumer spending in the USA could – despite higher financing costs – result in significantly stronger sales volume growth, reduced competitive pressure and the possibility of achieving better selling prices. Economic opportunities present themselves for the BMW Group through the focused identification of, and engagement in, growth markets. Any political and/or global economic opportunities capable of having a positive sustainable impact on earnings are currently classified by the BMW Group as insignificant. Strategic and sector risks and opportunities New regulations and rising fuel and energy prices can also influence customer behaviour. Medium- and long-term targets have already been put in place in Europe, North America, Japan, China and other countries to minimise both fuel consumption and carbon emissions. 72 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 18 Business Model 20 Management System 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 63 Outlook 68 Report on Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets Risks arising from the tightening of laws and regulations One of the greatest risks for the automobile industry is the possible threat of short-term tightening of laws and regulations, as they could give rise to significantly higher levels of investment and ongoing expenses, and perhaps more importantly, result in changes in customer behaviour. The potential tightening of consumer protection laws could also result in a greater number of recalls. In some cases, changes in customer behaviour are not only brought on by new regulations, but also through changes in public opinion, values, environmental issues and fuel/energy prices. There is a clear move towards increasingly stringent vehicle emissions regulations, particularly for conventional drive systems, not only in the developed markets of Europe and North America, but also in emerging markets such as China. The BMW Group counters this risk with its Efficient Dynamics technology and continues to play a pioneering role in the premium segment by continually reducing both fuel consumption and emissions. Since 2013, electric drive systems built into BMW i vehicles have increasingly broadened the mix on offer, thus bolstering the BMW Group’s efforts to comply with statutory carbon emissions regulations and requirements. The BMW Group is investing in the development of sustainable drive technologies and materials, with the aim of providing highly efficient vehicles for individual mobility in the premium segment, both now and in the future. Further significant risks could be triggered by the tightening of existing import and export regulations, resulting primarily in additional expenses, but also in restrictions in the import and export of vehicles and/or parts. Changes in the legal business environment are monitored and assessed regularly by the relevant centralised departments, thus ensuring that the BMW Group always complies with statutory requirements. The impact of legislation that has either been enacted or is likely to be enacted is taken into account in the outlook. Employees make a vital contribution to sustainable growth and improved profitability through their innovative skills. One prerequisite in this regard is a consistent strategic approach to the management of human resources, even in the event of changes in the legal framework. The BMW Group has put appropriate measures in place for such eventualities. Risk amounts and earnings impact in this category are measured on the basis of extensive scenario analyses. If strategic and sector category risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the twoyear assessment period. The amounts of risk attached to strategic and sector-specific risks are classified as high. Strategic and sector opportunities Additions to the product and mobility portfolio and expansion in growth regions are seen as the most important opportunities for growth in the medium to long term. Remaining on growth course depends above all on the ability to develop innovative products and bring them to market. The introduction of the BMW i brand opens up new customer target groups for the Group and consolidates the position of BMW as a sustainable, forwardlooking brand. BMW i products can be seen as “empowerment projects” for new technologies and processes, which may also benefit other vehicle concepts. The existing product portfolio has been expanded to include mobility services such as DriveNow, ChargeNow and ParkNow. In 2015, the BMW Group entered new segments with the BMW 2 Series Active Tourer and the 2 Series Gran Tourer. The market acceptance and sales volumes of product innovations that are either planned for the future or have recently been launched could turn out to be greater than predicted in the outlook. In the short term, however, any potentially positive impact is classified as insignificant. The long-term trend towards greater sustainability provides opportunities to boost sales of sustainable products and, under the right circumstances, achieve better selling prices. Innovations such as the BMW i3 and i8 in the field of electric mobility or Efficient Dynamics across the entire product portfolio provide excellent platforms for future growth. Potential also exists in engaging in new product and market categories and developing new customer target groups. New business models and cooperation arrangements with the BMW Group’s growing network of business partners often provide the best means to exploit these opportunities. Good examples are the implementation of the 360° ELECTRIC portfolio in the field of electric mobility, the partnership with Sixt in the field of mobility services, and collaboration with Toyota on developing a hydrogen fuel cell system. The BMW Group is constantly refining the tools it uses to recruit staff, encourage career development and retain employees within the Group. This environment offers people the ideal situation in which to develop their skills. If these measures generate greater benefits than currently expected, the BMW Group’s revenues, results of operations and cash flows can be positively impacted 73 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT and forecasted figures surpassed. Creating a successful performance culture and developing the expertise and skill sets of both staff and managers alike throughout the organisation can also have a positive impact on both revenue and profitability. The BMW Group’s earnings can be positively affected in the short to medium term by changes in the legal environment. A possible reduction in tariff barriers, import restrictions or direct excise duties could lower the cost of materials for the BMW Group, also enabling products and services to be offered to customers at lower prices. Overall, strategic and sector opportunities capable of having a positive and sustainable impact on earnings are currently classified by the BMW Group as insignificant. Risks and opportunities relating to operations Production- and technology-related risks Production stoppages and downtimes – in particular due to fire, but also to manufacturing and control equipment breakdowns or transportation and logistical disruptions – pose risks against which the BMW Group has put suitable measures in place. From the outset, production structures and processes are designed with a view to minimising any potential damage and its probability of occurrence. The broad array of measures taken includes technical fire protection solutions, land development measures including contingencies against flooding, preventative maintenance, spare parts management on a multi-site basis, and backup plans for alternative transportation. The level of risk is also reduced by the deployment of flexible work-schedule models and employee time accounts, but also by the ability to develop individual models at additional sites if necessary, thus enabling any backlog arising from production interruptions to be clawed back within a short time. Moreover, risks arising from business interruption and loss of production due to fire are also insured up to economically reasonable levels with underwriters of good credit standing. The development and production of technologically complex vehicles in high volumes is technically challenging and a source of potential quality risks. In order to achieve the outstanding level of quality expected of the BMW Group’s products and minimise both statutory and non-statutory warranty costs, it may possibly be necessary to incur a higher level of expenditure than originally forecast. There is also a risk of limited availability of products, particularly around the time of new vehicle production start-ups. These risks are mitigated through quality assurance activities in the form of regular audits and the continual improvement of quality management systems. The BMW Group also recognises appropriate provisions for both statutory and nonstatutory warranty obligations. These provisions reduce the risk to the BMW Group’s earnings, a fact already taken into account in the forecast. Further information on risks in conjunction with provisions for statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations is provided in note 36 of the Group Financial Statements. If risks from the production- and technology-related risks category were to materialise, they could have a high negative earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to productionand technology-related issues is classified as medium. Production- and technology-related opportunities Opportunities could arise as a result of product- or process-related technological innovations, or from organisational changes designed to improve efficiency or increase competitiveness. In the field of lightweight construction, for example, carbon is being utilised in high volumes for the first time in the automobile industry in the construction of the BMW i3. During the year under report, the BMW Group went one step further by introducing the use of carbon in the BMW 7 Series, thereby generating competitive benefits in the form of lower fuel consumption and better driving dynamics through reduced vehicle weight. Given the long lead times involved in developing new products and processes, the BMW Group does not expect these opportunities to have a material impact on earnings during the forecast period. Purchasing risks Close cooperation between carmakers and automotive suppliers in the development and production of vehicles and the provision of services generates economic benefits, but also raises levels of dependency. The increasing trend towards modular-based production with a set of common architectures covering various models and product lines exacerbates the consequences of the loss of an individual supplier or failure to supply on time. As part of the supplier preselection process, the BMW Group is careful to ensure that its future business partners meet the same high ecological, social and corporate governance standards by which the BMW Group itself expects to be measured. The BMW Group Sustainability Standard, which contains a set of fundamental principles and standards covering both production and 74 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 18 Business Model 20 Management System 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 63 Outlook 68 Report on Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets non-production aspects relevant for bought-in goods and services, serves as the basis for the supplier network, including the requirement to comply with internationally recognised human rights and applicable labour and social standards. The principal tool for ensuring compliance with the BMW Group Sustainability Standard is a three-stage sustainability and risk management approach comprising a BMW Group-specific sustainability risk filter, a sustainability questionnaire and a sustainability audit. In addition, the technical and finan cial capabilities of suppliers – especially those supplying for modular-based production – are continuously monitored during both the development and the production phases of the Group’s vehicles. Particular attention is paid to the quality of parts. In order to attain the level of quality required, it may become necessary to invest in new technological concepts or discontinue planned innovations, with the consequence that the cost of materials could exceed levels incorporated in the forecast. Supplier sites are assessed for exposure to natural hazards, such as floods or earthquakes, in order to identify supply risks at an early stage and implement appropriate countermeasures. Fire risks at series suppliers are evaluated by means of questionnaires and selective site inspections. Raw materials management procedures are in place to mitigate the risk of a production interruption due to shortages of supplies of critical raw materials. In order to reduce supply risks, the BMW Group works hard to minimise the input of raw materials or to use alternative raw materials as a substitute. The increasingly complex nature of the supplier network, especially at the level of sub-suppliers, whose operations can only be indirectly influenced by the BMW Group, is a further potential cause of downtimes at supplier locations. Production problems incurred by suppliers could have adverse consequences for the BMW Group, ranging from increased expenditure to production interruptions and a corresponding reduction in sales volume. If purchasing risks were to materialise, they could have a high negative earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to supply risk is classified as medium. Purchasing opportunities Global sourcing is seen as a key area for generating opportunities within the Purchasing and Supplier Network, whereby the BMW Group benefits from efficiency improvements and access to innovative solutions developed by suppliers, in some cases leading to a broader range of products. By observing and playing a proactive role in developing global supplier markets, the BMW Group continuously strives to increase its competitiveness by working together with the best providers in the global marketplace for products and services. Opportunities arise particularly in conjunction with the introduction of new and innovative production technologies and by capitalising on favourable location-specific cost factors that present themselves when local supplier structures are developed nearby new and existing BMW Group production plants. The integration of previously unidentified innovations from the supplier market in the product range is a further source of opportunities. Innovative suppliers are offered a variety of options when drawing up contracts, in order to make it more attractive for those developing innovative solutions. At regular intervals, the BMW Group honours its most inventive supplier entities with the Supplier Innovation Award. The BMW Group does not expect these opportunities to have a material earnings impact over the two-year assessment period when compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Risks relating to sales and marketing Changes in global economic conditions and increasingly protectionist trends are among the factors that could result in lower demand as well as fluctuations in the regional spread and composition of sales in terms of vehicles and mobility services. Risks relating to these developments can be reduced with the aid of flexible selling and production processes. At the same time, increased pressure on selling prices and margins caused by intense competition on the world’s markets, particularly in western Europe, the USA and China, requires constant analysis, including keeping an eye on developments in grey market volumes from the USA to China. Selling price and margin risks are measured using a scenario approach, based on a bottom-up survey of the key sales markets and an analysis of historical data. If sales and marketing risks were to materialise, they could have a high negative earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to sales and marketing risks is classified as high. 75 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT Opportunities relating to sales and marketing The BMW Group focuses its selling capacities primarily on markets with the greatest sales volume and revenue potential and fastest growth rates. Developments in the field of digital communication and connectivity are also opening up opportunities for marketing the BMW Group’s various brands. Consumers can meanwhile be reached on a more targeted and individual basis, thus helping to strengthen long-term relationships and brand loyalty. Investment in both existing and new marketing concepts is firmly aimed at intensifying relationships with customers. A new online sales platform was introduced in Great Britain, for example, which enables customers to select, finance and buy their vehicles online. There will be no relaxing of efforts in the active search for new opportunities to create even greater added value for customers than currently expected, whilst at the same time looking for ways to boost sales volumes and achieve better selling prices. The BMW Group keeps track of the latest developments and trends in communication technology, including the use of social media and networks, in order to extend customer reach for its brands. The automotive-related business activities of technology companies are also closely followed (e.g. automated driving). The BMW Group’s brands are present on numerous platforms, such as Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. Digital communication can result in a more intense product and brand experience for customers, which could, in turn, have a positive impact on revenues and earnings. The BMW Group considers that these opportunities will not have a material earnings impact over the two-year assessment period compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Risks and opportunities relating to pension obligations The BMW Group’s pension obligations to its employees resulting from defined benefit plans are measured on the basis of actuarial reports. Future pension payments are discounted by reference to market yields on highquality corporate bonds. These yields are subject to market fluctuation and therefore influence the level of pension obligations. Changes in other parameters, such as rises in inflation and longer life expectancy, also impact pension obligations and payments. Opportunities and risks arise depending on the nature and scale of changes in these parameters. Most of the BMW Group’s pension obligations are managed in external pension funds or trust arrangements and the related assets are kept separate from those of the Group. The amount of funds required to finance pension payments out of operations in the future is therefore substantially reduced, since most of the Group’s pension obligations are settled out of pension fund assets. The pension assets of the BMW Group comprise interest-bearing securities, equities, real estate and other investment classes. Assets held by pension funds and trust arrangements are monitored continuously and managed on a risk-and-yield basis. A broad spread of investments also helps to mitigate risk. In order to reduce fluctuations in pension funding shortfalls, investments are structured to coincide with the timing of pension payments and the expected pattern of pension obligations. Remeasurements on the obligations and fund asset sides are recognised, net of deferred taxes, in “Other comprehensive income” and hence directly in equity (within revenue reserves). If risks relating to pension obligations were to materialise, they could have a high negative earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk relating to pension obligations is classified as high. Within a favourable capital market environment, the return generated by pension assets may exceed expectations and reduce the deficit of the relevant pension plans. This, in turn, could have a materially favourable impact on the net assets position and earnings performance of the BMW Group. Further information on risks in conjunction with pension provisions is provided in note 35 of the Group Financial Statements. Risks and opportunities relating to information, data protection and IT systems Information technology (IT) is used to an increasing extent in every aspect of the business. In this context, the significance of electronically processed data and the availability of IT systems is constantly growing. These developments create opportunities on the one hand, whilst also posing a source of risk on the other. Information, data protection and IT risks The BMW Group could incur damage if the confidentiality or integrity of sensitive information, data and systems were to be compromised and/or availability restricted. One of the direct consequences of such an eventuality would be additional expense incurred to recover data and restore systems. Such eventualities could 76 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 18 Business Model 20 Management System 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 63 Outlook 68 Report on Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets also possibly have a negative impact on operating performance due to the non-availability of products and services or even downtimes in the production of spare parts and/or vehicles. Indirectly, the BMW Group could also be exposed to unquantifiable reputational risks. Risk management procedures include the systematic documentation of all informational and IT risks, regular monitoring, and the implementation of appropriate measures by the departments responsible. Technical data protection procedures include virus scanners, firewall systems, access authorisation controls at both operating system and application level, regular data backups and data encryption. Regular analyses and controls (for example the testing of data protection requirements) and rigorous security management ensure a high level of security. The demands placed on IT facilities, both externally and internally, are changing at a breathtaking pace in the face of technological developments. Potential risks are therefore investigated continuously and appropriate measures put in place in order to either prevent them or minimise their impact. Despite regular testing and the whole gamut of preventative security measures employed, it is nevertheless impossible to rule out risks completely in this area. Great emphasis is placed on protecting both business information and employee and customer data from unauthorised access and/or misuse. Data security based on International Security Standard ISO/IEC 27001 is an integral component in all business processes. Personal data is protected in accordance with the stringent requirements of the EU Data Protection Directive and the Federal Data Protection Act (Bundes daten schutzgesetz – BDSG). All employees are required to treat confidential information (such as customer and employee data) in an appropriate manner, ensure that information systems are properly used and that risks are handled with the utmost transparency. Uniform requirements, documented in a coordinated and comprehensive set of principles, guidelines and work instructions, are applicable groupwide. Regular communication and awareness-raising activities create a high degree of security and risk consciousness among the employees involved. Employees receive training to ensure compliance with the applicable requirements and in-house rules. Responsibility for data protection in each Group entity lies with the Board of Management (of BMWAG) or the relevant company management team. Local Data Privacy Protection Officers are embedded in each of the Group’s entities. In the case of cooperation arrangements and business partner relationships, the BMW Group protects its intellectual property as well as customer and employee data by stipulating clear instructions with regard to data protection and the use of information technology. Information pertaining to key areas of expertise as well as sensitive personal data are subject to particularly stringent security measures. In a clear signal to employees, customers and Europe’s data protection authorities that data protection is taken very seriously, the Board of Management of BMWAG has resolved a set of Binding Corporate Rules governing the handling of employee data. If information, data protection and IT risks were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The levels of risk attached to information, data protection and IT risks are classified as medium. Information, data protection and IT opportunities Conversely, the deployment of information technology also opens up a great many opportunities for the BMW Group. New approaches to production and energy supply systems currently being investigated in the context of the Industrial Internet (“Industrie 4.0”) are generating significant efficiency improvements and resulting in greater sustainability. The range of services and apps on offer to customers via Connected Drive is constantly being expanded and updated. The BMW 7 Series offers the comfort of partially automated driving functions with the optional Driving Assistant Plus feature. The purchase of a stake in HERE mapping service was an important step for the next generation of mobility and location-based services. For the automobile sector, it serves as the basis for a variety of new customer-oriented functions, ranging from innovative assistance systems through to fully automated driving. The BMW Group does not expect these opportunities to have a material earnings impact over the two-year 77 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT assessment period compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Financial risks and risks relating to the use of financial instruments Currency risks and opportunities As an internationally operating enterprise, the BMW Group conducts business in a variety of currencies, thus giving rise to currency risks and opportunities. Since a substantial portion of Group revenues is generated outside the eurozone (particularly in China and the USA) and the procurement of production material and funding is also organised on a worldwide basis, fluctuations in exchange rates can play a significant role for Group earnings. Cash-flow-at-risk models and scenario analyses are used to measure currency risks and opportunities. Operational currency management is based on the results provided by these tools. In 2015 the Chinese renminbi, the US dollar, the British pound, the Russian rouble and the Japanese yen constituted approximately 70 % of the total foreign currency exposure of the BMW Group. The BMW Group manages currency risks at both strategic (medium and long term) and operating levels (short and medium term). Medium- and long-term measures include increasing production volumes in non-euro-region countries (natural hedging) and increasing purchase volumes denominated in foreign currencies. Constructing new plants in countries such as the USA, China or Brazil has also helped reduce foreign currency exposures. Currency risks are managed in the short to medium term and for operational purposes by means of hedging. Hedging transactions are entered into only with financial partners of good credit standing. Opportunities are also secured through the deployment of options. Counterparty risk management procedures are carried out continuously in order to monitor the creditworthiness of business partners. If currency risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. A high level of risk is attached to currency risks. Significant opportunities can arise if currency developments are favourable for the BMW Group. Risks and opportunities relating to raw materials Changes in prices of raw materials are monitored on the basis of a set of well-defined management procedures. The principal objective of these management processes is to increase planning reliability for the BMW Group. Price risks and opportunities relating to precious metals (platinum, palladium, rhodium) and non-ferrous metals (aluminium, copper, lead) and, to some extent, to steel and steel ingredients (iron ore, coke/coal) and energy (gas, electricity) are hedged using financial derivatives and/or supply contracts with fixed pricing arrangements. If risks relating to raw materials were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. A high level of risk is attached to risks relating to raw materials. Conversely, significant opportunities can arise if prices of raw materials develop favourably for the BMW Group. Liquidity risks Based on experience gained during the financial crisis, a minimum liquidity concept has been developed and is rigorously adhered to. Solvency is assured at all times throughout the BMW Group by maintaining a liquidity reserve and by the broad diversification of refinancing sources. The liquidity position is monitored continuously at a separate entity level and managed by means of a cash flow requirements and sourcing forecast system in place throughout the Group. Liquidity risks may be reflected in rising refinancing costs. They may also manifest themselves in restricted access to funds as a consequence of the general market situation or the default of individual banks. The major part of the Financial Services segment’s credit financing and lease business is refinanced on capital markets. Thanks to its excellent creditworthiness, the BMW Group has good access to financial markets and, as in previous years, was able to raise funds at good conditions during the year under report, reflecting a diversified refinancing strategy and the solid liquidity and earnings base of the BMW Group. Internationally recognised rating agencies have additionally confirmed the BMW Group’s strong creditworthiness. If liquidity risks were to materialise, they could have a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk of incurring liquidity risk is classified as low – including the risk of the BMW Group’s rating 78 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 18 Business Model 20 Management System 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 63 Outlook 68 Report on Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets being downgraded and any ensuing deterioration in financing conditions. A description of the methods applied for risk measurement and hedging in conjunction with currency and commodity risks is provided in note 42 of the Group Finan cial Statements. If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group as hedges are accounted for as hedging relationships. Further information on risks in conjunction with financial instruments is provided in note 42 to the Group Financial Statements. Risks and opportunities relating to the Financial Services segment The categories of risk relating to the provision of financial services are credit and counterparty risk, residual value risk, interest rate risk, liquidity risk and operational risk. In order to identify, measure, manage and monitor these risks, a variety of internal methods has been developed based on regulatory environment requirements (such as Basel III) and which comply with both national and international standards. The adopted risk strategy, in combination with a set of strategic principles and rules derived from regulatory requirements, serve as the basis for risk management within the Financial Services segment. At the heart of the risk management process is a clear division between front- and back-office activities and a comprehensive internal control system. The key risk management tool employed within the Financial Services segment is aimed at ensuring that the Group’s risk-bearing capacity is not exceeded. In this context, all risks (defined as “unexpected losses”) must be covered at all times by an appropriate asset cushion in the form of equity capital. Unexpected losses are measured using a variety of value-at-risk techniques that have been developed for each risk category. The appropriateness of these techniques is tested at regular intervals. Risks are aggregated after taking account of correlation effects. The total amount of risks calculated in this way is then compared with the so-called “risk coverage amount”, i.e. the resources allocated to cover risks. The risk coverage amount is determined on the basis of the Financial Services segment’s willingness to take risks. The segment’s risk-bearing capacity is monitored continuously with the aid of an integrated limit system that also differentiates between the various risk categories. The segment’s total risk exposure was covered at all times during the past year by the available riskcoverage volumes. Credit and counterparty risks and opportunities Credit and counterparty default risk arises within the Financial Services segment if a contractual partner (i.e. a customer or dealer) either becomes unable or only partially able to fulfil its contractual obligations, such that either lower income is generated or losses are incurred. The Financial Services segment uses a variety of rating systems in order to assess the creditworthiness of its contractual partners. Credit risks are managed at the time of the initial credit decision on the basis of a calculation of the present value of standard risk costs and subsequently, during the term of the credit, by using a range of risk provisioning techniques to cover risks emanating from changes in customer creditworthiness. In this context, individual customers are classified by category each month on the basis of their current contractual status, and appropriate levels of allowance recognised in accordance with that classification. If economies develop more favourably than assumed in the outlook, there is a chance that credit losses may be reduced and earnings improved accordingly. If credit and counterparty risks were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the twoyear assessment period. The level of risk attached to credit and counterparty risks is classified as high. The BMW Group classifies potential opportunities in this area as significant. Residual value risks and opportunities Risks and opportunities arise in conjunction with lease contracts if the market value of a leased vehicle at the end of the contractual term of a lease differs from the residual value estimated at the inception of the lease and factored into the lease payments. A residual value risk exists if the expected market value of the vehicle at the end of the contractual term is lower than its estimated residual value at the date the contract is entered into. Each vehicle’s estimated residual value is calculated on the basis of historical external and internal data and used to predict the expected market value of the vehicle at the end of the contractual period. As part of the process of managing residual value risks, a calculation is performed at the inception of each contract to determine the net present value of risk costs. Market developments are observed throughout the contractual period and the risk assessment updated appropriately. 79 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT If residual value risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. A medium earnings impact would then arise for the segments affected (Financial Services and Automotive). The level of risk is classified as high for the Group as a whole. The BMW Group classifies potential residual value opportunities as significant. Interest rate risks and opportunities Interest rate risks in the Financial Services segment relate to potential losses caused by changes in market interest rates and can arise when fixed interest rate periods for assets and liabilities recognised in the balance sheet do not match. Interest rate risks in the Financial Services line of business are managed by raising refinancing funds with matching maturities and by employing interest rate derivatives. If risks relating to interest rate risks were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to interest rate risks is classified as high. Interest rate developments that are positive compared to the forecast constitute interest rate opportunities which the BMW Group classifies as significant. If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group are accounted for as hedging relationships. Further information on risks in conjunction with financial instruments is provided in note 42 to the Group Financial Statements. Liquidity and operational risks in the Financial Services segment Use of the “matched funding principle” to finance the Financial Services segment’s operations eliminates liquidity risks to a large extent. Regular measurement and monitoring ensure that cash inflows and outflows from transactions in varying maturity cycles and currencies offset each other. The relevant procedures are incorporated in the BMW Group’s target liquidity concept. Operational risks are defined in the Financial Services segment as the risk of losses arising as a consequence of the inappropriateness or failure of internal procedures (process risks), people (personnel-related risks), systems (infrastructure and IT risks) and external events (external risks). These four categories of risk also include related legal and reputational risks. The comprehensive recording and measurement of risk scenarios, loss events and countermeasures in the Operational Risk Management Suite (OpRisk-Suite) provides the basis for a systematic analysis and management of potential and/or actual operational risks. Annual self-assessments are also carried out. If operational risks were to materialise, they could have a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to operational risks is classified as medium. Legal risks Compliance with the law is a basic prerequisite for the success of the BMW Group. Current law provides the binding framework for the BMW Group’s various business activities around the world. The growing international scale of the BMW Group’s operations, the complexity of the business world and the whole gamut of complex legal regulations increase the risk of laws not being adhered to, simply because they are either not known or not fully understood. The BMW Group has established a Compliance Organisation aimed at ensuring that its representative bodies, managers and staff act in a lawful manner at all times. Further information on the BMW Group’s Compliance Organisation can be found in the section “Corporate Governance”. Like all internationally operating enterprises, the BMW Group is confronted with legal disputes relating, in particular, to warranty claims, product liability, infringements of protected rights and proceedings initiated by government agencies. Any of these matters could, among other outcomes, have an adverse impact on the Group’s reputation. Such proceedings are typical for the sector and can arise as a consequence of realigning product or purchasing strategies to suit changed market conditions. Particularly in the US market, class action lawsuits and product liability risks can have substantial financial consequences and cause damage to the Group’s public image. The high quality of the Group’s products, which is ensured by regular quality audits and ongoing improvement measures, helps reduce this risk. The BMW Group recognises appropriate levels of provision for lawsuits. A part of these risks, particularly regarding the US market, is insured where this makes 80 18 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT 18 General Information on the BMW Group 18 Business Model 20 Management System 23 Report on Economic Position 23 General and Sector-specific Environment 27 Overall Assessment by Management 27 Financial and Non-financial Performance Indicators 29 Review of Operations 49 Results of Operations, Financial Position and Net Assets 59 Comments on Financial Statements of BMW AG 62 Events after the End of the Reporting Period 63 Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities 63 Outlook 68 Report on Risks and Opportunities 81 Internal Control System and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting Process 83 Disclosures Relevant for Takeovers and Explanatory Comments 87 BMW Stock and Capital Markets business sense. The application of more rigorous consumer regulations or the stricter interpretation of existing regulations could result in a greater number of recalls. Some risks, however, either cannot be estimated or only to a limited extent. In other cases, the incurrence of expenses or losses may only be considered possible, but not probable. Such items are reported as contingent liabilities. It cannot be ruled out, however, that losses from damages could arise that are either not covered or not fully covered by insurance policies or provisions, or which are only reported as contingent liabilities. In accordance with IAS 37 (Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets), the required information is not provided if the BMW Group concludes that disclosure of the information could seriously prejudice the outcome of the relevant legal proceedings. Further information on contingent liabilities is provided in note 41 to the Group Financial Statements. If legal risks were to materialise, they could have a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The level of risk attached to legal risks is classified as low. However, it cannot be ruled out that new legal risks, as yet unidentified, could materialise that could have a high impact on the BMW Group’s results of operations and financial condition. Overall assessment of the risk and opportunities situation The overall risk assessment is based on a consolidated view of all significant individual risks and opportunities. In terms of strategic and sector-specific risks, the BMW Group has identified a higher level of risk, particularly in connection with the trend towards stricter statutory regulations. Operational risks on the purchasing side are decreasing, thanks to the successful implementation of cost-cutting measures. The level of risk attached to the category “Risks relating to the Financial Services segment” has increased as a result of the growing size of the portfolio. In view of these changes, the overall risk situation for the BMW Group has increased compared to the previous year. In addition to the risk categories described above, unforeseeable events could possibly have a negative impact on the BMW Group’s results of operations, financial position and net assets, as well as on its reputation. A comprehensive risk management system is in place to ensure that the BMW Group successfully manages risks to the greatest extent possible. In addition, the opportunities described above could potentially help the BMW Group to achieve its targets and forecasts. From today’s perspective, management does not see any threat to the BMW Group’s going-concern status. As in the previous year, identified risks are considered to be manageable, but could – just like opportunities – have an impact on the BMW Group’s forecasts if they were to materialise. The BMW Group’s liquidity is stable and all cash requirements are currently covered by available funds and accessible credit lines. 81 COMBINED MANAGEMENT REPORT The internal control system in place throughout the BMW Group is aimed at ensuring the effectiveness of operations. It makes an important contribution towards ensuring compliance with the laws that apply to the BMW Group as well as providing assurance on the propriety and reliability of internal and external financial reporting. The internal control system is therefore a significant factor in the management of process risks. The principal features of the internal control system and the risk management system, as far as they relate to individual entity and Group financial reporting processes, are described below. Information and communication One component of the internal control system is that of “Information and Communication”. It ensures that all the information needed to achieve the objectives set for the internal control system is made available to those responsible in an appropriate and timely manner. Information relevant for the various financial reporting processes – at BMWAG, other consolidated Group entities and for the BMW Group as a whole – is set out primarily in organisational manuals, internal and external financial reporting guidelines, accounting manuals and training documentation. This information, which can be accessed at all levels via the BMW Group’s intranet system, provide the framework for ensuring that the relevant rules are applied consistently throughout the Group. The quality and relevance of these instructions are ensured by regular review as well as by continuous communication between the relevant departments. Organisational measures All financial reporting processes (including Group financial reporting processes) are structured in organisational terms in accordance with the principle of segregation of duties, thus making an important contribution to the early identification of errors and the prevention of potential wrongdoing. Regular comparison of internal forecasts and external financial reports, for example, improves the quality of financial reporting. Moreover, the internal audit department, in its capacity as a process-independent function, tests and assesses the effectiveness of the internal control system and proposes improvements where appropriate. Controls Extensive controls are carried out by managers and staff in all financial reporting processes at an individual entity and Group level, thus ensuring that legal requirements and internal guidelines are complied with and that all business transactions are properly executed. Controls are also carried out with the aid of IT applications, thus reducing the incidence of process risks. Moreover, the performance of controls on accounts deemed to be exposed to risk are subject to additional monitoring. IT authorisations All IT applications used in financial reporting processes throughout the BMW Group are subject to access restrictions, allowing only authorised persons to gain access to systems and data in a controlled environment. Access authorisations are allocated on the basis of the nature of the duties to be performed. In addition, IT processes are designed and authorisations allocated using the dual control principle, as a result of which, for instance, requests cannot be submitted and approved by the same person. Technical monitoring procedures are also in place to ensure appropriate authorisation security throughout all IT systems. Internal control training for employees All employees are appropriately trained to carry out their duties and kept informed of any changes in regulations or processes that affect them. Managers and staff also have access to detailed best-practice descriptions relating to risks and controls in the various processes, thus increasing risk awareness at all levels. As a consequence, the internal control system can be evaluated regularly and further improved as necessary. Employees can, at any time and independently, deepen their understanding of control methods and design using an information platform that is accessible throughout the entire Group. Evaluating the effectiveness of the internal control system Responsibilities for ensuring the effectiveness of the internal control system in relation to individual entity Internal Control System* and Risk Management System Relevant for the Financial Reporting.
OVERVIEW Segments. We review and present our business results in two sectors: Automotive and Financial Services. Within these sectors, our business is divided into reportable segments (referred to herein as “segments,” “business units,” or “regions”) based on the organizational structure that we use to evaluate performance and make decisions on resource allocation, as well as availability and materiality of separate financial results consistent with that structure. The reportable segments within our Automotive and Financial Services sectors at December 31, 2015 were as described in the table below: Business Sector Reportable Segments Description Automotive: North America Primarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories in North America (the United States, Canada, and Mexico), together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. South America Primarily includes the sale of Ford vehicles, service parts, and accessories in South America, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. Europe Primarily includes the sale of Ford vehicles, components, service parts, and accessories in Europe, Turkey, and Russia, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. Middle East & Africa Primarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories in the Middle East and Africa, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. Asia Pacific Primarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories in the Asia Pacific region, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. Financial Services: Ford Credit Primarily includes vehicle-related financing and leasing activities. AUTOMOTIVE SECTOR General Our vehicle brands are Ford and Lincoln. In 2015, we sold approximately 6,635,000 vehicles at wholesale throughout the world. See “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” (“Item 7”) for discussion of our calculation of wholesale unit volumes. Substantially all of our vehicles, parts, and accessories are sold through distributors and dealers (collectively, “dealerships”), the substantial majority of which are independently owned. At December 31, 2015, the approximate number of dealerships worldwide distributing our vehicle brands was as follows: Brand Number of Dealerships at December 31, 2015 Ford 10,727 Ford-Lincoln (combined) 884 Lincoln 360 Total 11,971 We do not depend on any single customer or a few customers to the extent that the loss of such customers would have a material adverse effect on our business. In addition to the products we sell to our dealerships for retail sale, we also sell vehicles to our dealerships for sale to fleet customers, including commercial fleet customers, daily rental car companies, and governments. We also sell parts and accessories, primarily to our dealerships (which in turn sell these products to retail customers) and to authorized parts distributors (which in turn primarily sell these products to retailers). We also offer extended service contracts. The worldwide automotive industry is affected significantly by general economic conditions over which we have little control. Vehicles are durable goods, and consumers have latitude in determining whether and when to replace an existing vehicle. The decision whether to purchase a vehicle may be affected significantly by slowing economic growth, Item 1. Business (Continued) 3 geopolitical events, and other factors (including the cost of purchasing and operating cars and trucks and the availability and cost of financing and fuel). As we have seen in the United States and Europe, in particular, the number of cars and trucks sold may vary substantially from year to year. Further, the automotive industry is a highly competitive business that has a wide and growing variety of product offerings from a growing number of manufacturers. Our wholesale unit volumes vary with the level of total industry demand and our share of that industry demand. Our wholesale unit volumes also are influenced by the level of dealer inventory. Our share is influenced by how our products are perceived in comparison to those offered by other manufacturers based on many factors, including price, quality, styling, reliability, safety, fuel efficiency, functionality, and reputation. Our share also is affected by the timing and frequency of new model introductions. Our ability to satisfy changing consumer preferences with respect to type or size of vehicle, as well as design and performance characteristics, affects our sales and earnings significantly. As with other manufacturers, the profitability of our business is affected by many factors, including: • Wholesale unit volumes • Margin of profit on each vehicle sold - which in turn is affected by many factors, such as: Market factors - volume and mix of vehicles and options sold, and net pricing (reflecting, among other factors, incentive programs) Costs of components and raw materials necessary for production of vehicles Costs for customer warranty claims and additional service actions Costs for safety, emissions, and fuel economy technology and equipment • A high proportion of relatively fixed structural costs, so that small changes in wholesale unit volumes can significantly affect overall profitability Our industry has a very competitive pricing environment, driven in part by industry excess capacity, which is concentrated in Europe and Asia but affects other markets because much of this capacity can be redirected to other markets. The decline in the value of the yen during the past four years also has contributed significantly to competitive pressures in many of our markets. For the past several decades, manufacturers typically have given price discounts and other marketing incentives to maintain market share and production levels. A discussion of our strategies to compete in this pricing environment is set forth in the “Overview” section in Item 7. Competitive Position. The worldwide automotive industry consists of many producers, with no single dominant producer. Certain manufacturers, however, account for the major percentage of total sales within particular countries, especially their countries of origin. Key competitors with global presence include Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, General Motors Company, Honda Motor Company, Hyundai-Kia Automotive Group, PSA Peugeot Citroen, Renault-Nissan B.V., Suzuki Motor Corporation, Toyota Motor Corporation, and Volkswagen AG Group. Seasonality. We generally record the sale of a vehicle (and recognize revenue) when it is produced and shipped or delivered to our customer (i.e., the dealership). See the “Overview” section in Item 7 for additional discussion of revenue recognition practices. We manage our vehicle production schedule based on a number of factors, including retail sales (i.e., units sold by our dealerships to their customers at retail) and dealer stock levels (i.e., the number of units held in inventory by our dealerships for sale to their customers). Historically, we have experienced some seasonal fluctuation in the business, with production in many markets tending to be higher in the first half of the year to meet demand in the spring and summer (typically the strongest sales months of the year). Raw Materials. We purchase a wide variety of raw materials from numerous suppliers around the world for use in production of our vehicles. These materials include base metals (e.g., steel, iron castings, and aluminum), precious metals (e.g., palladium), energy (e.g., natural gas), and plastics/resins (e.g., polypropylene). We believe we have adequate supplies or sources of availability of raw materials necessary to meet our needs. There always are risks and uncertainties with respect to the supply of raw materials, however, which could impact availability in sufficient quantities to meet our needs. See the “Overview” section of Item 7 for a discussion of commodity and energy price trends, and “Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk” (“Item 7A”) for a discussion of commodity price risks. Backlog Orders. We generally produce and ship our products on average within approximately 20 days after an order is deemed to become firm. Therefore, no significant amount of backlog orders accumulates during any period. Item 1. Business (Continued) 4 Intellectual Property. We own or hold licenses to use numerous patents, copyrights, and trademarks on a global basis. Our policy is to protect our competitive position by, among other methods, filing U.S. and international patent applications to protect technology and improvements that we consider important to the development of our business. We have generated a large number of patents, and expect this portfolio to continue to grow as we actively pursue additional technological innovation. We have approximately 38,500 active patents and pending patent applications globally, with an average age for patents in our active patent portfolio of just over five years. In addition to this intellectual property, we also rely on our proprietary knowledge and ongoing technological innovation to develop and maintain our competitive position. Although we believe these patents, patent applications, and know-how, in the aggregate, are important to the conduct of our business, and we obtain licenses to use certain intellectual property owned by others, none is individually considered material to our business. We also own numerous trademarks and service marks that contribute to the identity and recognition of our Company and its products and services globally. Certain of these marks are integral to the conduct of our business, a loss of any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business. Warranty Coverage, Field Service Actions, and Customer Satisfaction Actions. We provide warranties on vehicles we sell. Warranties are offered for specific periods of time and/or mileage, and vary depending upon the type of product and the geographic location of its sale. Pursuant to these warranties, we will repair, replace, or adjust all parts on a vehicle that are defective in factory-supplied materials or workmanship during the specified warranty period. In addition to the costs associated with this warranty coverage provided on our vehicles, we also incur costs as a result of field service actions (i.e., safety recalls, emission recalls, and other product campaigns), and for customer satisfaction actions. For additional information regarding warranty and related costs, see “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 and Note 27 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. Item 1. Business (Continued) 5 Industry Volume, Market Share, and Wholesales Our industry volume, market share, and wholesale unit volume in each region and in certain key markets within each region during the past three years were as follows: Industry Volume (a) Market Share (b) Wholesales (c) (in millions of units) (as a percentage) (in thousands of units) 2015 2014 2013 2015 2014 2013 2015 2014 2013 United States 17.8 16.8 15.9 14.7% 14.7% 15.7% 2,677 2,457 2,608 Canada 1.9 1.9 1.8 14.4 15.5 15.9 285 288 283 Mexico 1.4 1.2 1.1 6.7 6.9 8.0 93 77 91 North America 21.5 20.2 19.1 14.0 14.2 15.2 3,073 2,842 3,006 Brazil 2.6 3.5 3.8 10.4% 9.4% 9.4% 250 320 364 Argentina 0.6 0.7 0.9 14.8 14.1 12.6 94 94 118 South America 4.2 5.3 5.9 9.6 8.9 8.9 381 463 538 Britain 3.1 2.8 2.6 14.3% 14.4% 14.6% 447 425 379 Germany 3.5 3.4 3.3 7.3 7.1 6.9 261 237 227 Russia 1.6 2.5 2.8 2.4 2.6 3.8 38 57 105 Turkey 1.0 0.8 0.9 12.6 11.7 12.9 128 91 114 Europe (d) 19.2 18.6 18.3 7.7 7.2 7.3 1,530 1,387 1,317 Middle East & Africa 4.3 4.3 3.9 4.5% 4.6% 5.0% 187 192 199 China (e) 25.1 24.0 22.2 4.5% 4.5% 4.1% 1,160 1,116 936 Australia 1.2 1.1 1.1 6.1 7.2 7.7 71 80 85 India 3.4 3.2 3.3 2.1 2.4 2.5 78 77 80 ASEAN (f) 3.0 3.2 3.5 3.3 3.1 2.7 94 94 99 Asia Pacific (g) 40.5 39.7 37.8 3.5 3.5 3.3 1,464 1,439 1,270 Global 89.5 88.1 85.0 7.3% 7.1% 7.3% N/A N/A N/A Total Company N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 6,635 6,323 6,330 ______________ (a) Industry volume is an internal estimate based on publicly-available data collected from various government, private, and public sources around the globe and is based, in part, on estimated vehicle registrations. (b) Market share represents reported retail sales of our brands as a percent of total industry volume in the relevant market or region. Market share is based, in part, on estimated vehicle registrations; includes medium and heavy trucks. (c) Wholesale unit volume includes sales of medium and heavy trucks. Wholesale unit volume includes all Ford and Lincoln badged units (whether produced by Ford or by an unconsolidated affiliate) that are sold to dealerships, units manufactured by Ford that are sold to other manufacturers, units distributed for other manufacturers, and local brand units produced by our unconsolidated Chinese joint venture Jiangling Motors Corporation, Ltd. (“JMC”) that are sold to dealerships. Vehicles sold to daily rental car companies that are subject to a guaranteed repurchase option (i.e., rental repurchase), as well as other sales of finished vehicles for which the recognition of revenue is deferred (e.g., consignments), also are included in wholesale unit volume. Revenue from certain vehicles in wholesale unit volume (specifically, Ford badged vehicles produced and distributed by our unconsolidated affiliates, as well as JMC brand vehicles) are not included in our revenue. (d) Amounts shown are based on total Europe. We previously reported these amounts on a Europe 20 basis, which consisted of Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Europe 20 industry volume was 16.0 million, 14.6 million, and 13.8 million in 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively. Europe 20 market share was 8.0%, 7.9%, and 7.8% in 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively. (e) China industry volume and market share for years shown above are based on estimated wholesales. In 2016, we will begin using estimated vehicle registrations as a basis for calculating industry volume and market share. China industry volume, based on estimated vehicle registrations, was 23.5 million units in 2015. (f) ASEAN includes Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam, and Malaysia. (g) Asia Pacific market share includes Ford brand and JMC brand vehicles produced and sold by our unconsolidated affiliates. Item 1. Business (Continued) 6 FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR Ford Motor Credit Company LLC Our wholly-owned subsidiary Ford Credit offers a wide variety of automotive financing products to and through automotive dealers throughout the world. The predominant share of Ford Credit’s business consists of financing our vehicles and supporting our dealers. Ford Credit earns its revenue primarily from payments made under retail installment sale and lease contracts that it originates and purchases; interest rate supplements and other support payments from us and our subsidiaries; and payments made under dealer financing programs. As a result of these financing activities, Ford Credit has a large portfolio of finance receivables and operating leases which it classifies into two portfolios— “consumer” and “non-consumer.” Finance receivables and operating leases in the consumer portfolio include products offered to individuals and businesses that finance the acquisition of our vehicles from dealers for personal and commercial use. Retail financing includes retail installment sale contracts for new and used vehicles and direct financing leases for new vehicles to retail and commercial customers including leasing companies, government entities, daily rental companies, and fleet customers. Finance receivables in the non-consumer portfolio include products offered to automotive dealers. Ford Credit makes wholesale loans to dealers to finance the purchase of vehicle inventory (i.e., floorplan financing), as well as loans to dealers to finance working capital and improvements to dealership facilities, finance the purchase of dealership real estate, and finance other dealer vehicle programs. Ford Credit also purchases receivables generated by us and our subsidiaries, primarily related to the sale of parts and accessories to dealers, receivables from Ford-related loans, and certain used vehicles from daily rental fleet companies. Ford Credit does business in the United States and Canada through business centers. Outside of the United States, Europe is Ford Credit’s largest operation. Ford Credit’s European operations are managed through its United Kingdombased subsidiary, FCE Bank plc (“FCE”). Within Europe, FCE’s largest markets are the United Kingdom and Germany, representing 67% of FCE’s finance receivables and operating leases. The following table shows Ford Credit’s financing shares of new Ford and Lincoln vehicles sold in the United States and new Ford vehicles sold in Europe, as well as its wholesale financing shares of new Ford and Lincoln vehicles acquired by dealers in the United States (excluding fleet) and new Ford vehicles acquired by dealers in Europe: Years Ended December 31, 2015 2014 2013 United States - Financing Share Retail installment and lease 47% 45% 40% Wholesale 76 77 77 Europe - Financing Share Retail installment and lease 37% 36% 34% Wholesale 98 98 98 See Item 7 and Notes 5, 6, and 7 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for a detailed discussion of Ford Credit’s receivables, credit losses, allowance for credit losses, loss-to-receivables ratios, funding sources, and funding strategies. See Item 7A for discussion of how Ford Credit manages its financial market risks. We routinely sponsor special retail and lease incentives to dealers’ customers who choose to finance or lease our vehicles from Ford Credit. In order to compensate Ford Credit for the lower interest or lease payments offered to the retail customer, we pay the value of the incentive directly to Ford Credit when it originates the retail finance or lease contract. These programs increase Ford Credit’s financing volume and share. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for information about our accounting for these programs. On April 30, 2015, we entered into an Amended and Restated Relationship Agreement with Ford Credit, pursuant to which, if Ford Credit’s managed leverage for a calendar quarter were to be higher than 11.5:1 (as reported in its most recent periodic report), Ford Credit could require us to make or cause to be made a capital contribution to it in an amount sufficient to have caused such managed leverage to have been 11.5:1. No capital contributions have been made pursuant to this agreement. The agreement also limits to $3 billion the amount Ford Credit may borrow under our Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of April 30, 2015. In a separate agreement with FCE, Ford Credit also has agreed to maintain FCE’s net worth in excess of $500 million; no payments have been made pursuant to that agreement. Item 1. Business (Continued) 7 GOVERNMENTAL STANDARDS Many governmental standards and regulations relating to safety, fuel economy, emissions control, noise control, vehicle recycling, substances of concern, vehicle damage, and theft prevention are applicable to new motor vehicles, engines, and equipment manufactured for sale in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere. In addition, manufacturing and other automotive assembly facilities in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere are subject to stringent standards regulating air emissions, water discharges, and the handling and disposal of hazardous substances. The most significant of the standards and regulations affecting us are discussed below: Vehicle Emissions Control U.S. Requirements – Federal Emission Standards. The federal Clean Air Act imposes stringent limits on the amount of regulated pollutants that lawfully may be emitted by new vehicles and engines produced for sale in the United States. In 2014, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) finalized new “Tier 3” regulations that phase in increasingly stringent motor vehicle emission standards beginning with the 2017 model year; compliance with these standards could be challenging. Compliance with automobile emission standards depends in part on the widespread availability of highquality and consistent automotive fuels that the vehicles were designed to use. Fuel variables that can affect vehicle emissions include ethanol content, octane ratings, and the use of metallic-based fuel additives, among other things. There are various ongoing regulatory and judicial proceedings related to fuel quality at the national and state level, and the outcome of these proceedings could affect vehicle manufacturers’ warranty costs as well as their ability to comply with vehicle emission standards. U.S. Requirements – California and Other State Emission Standards. Pursuant to the Clean Air Act, California may establish its own unique vehicle emission standards; the California standards can also be adopted by other states. The California Air Resources Board (“CARB”) has adopted “LEV III” standards, which took effect with the 2015 model year and impose increasingly stringent tailpipe and evaporative emissions requirements for light and medium duty vehicles. Thirteen states, primarily located in the Northeast and Northwest, have adopted the LEV III standards. The California vehicle emissions program also includes requirements for manufacturers to produce and deliver for sale zero-emission vehicles (“ZEVs”). The current ZEV regulations mandate substantial annual increases in the production and sale of battery-electric, fuel cell, and plug-in hybrid vehicles, particularly for the 2018–2025 model years. By the 2025 model year, approximately 15% of a manufacturer’s total California sales volume will need to be made up of such vehicles. Compliance with ZEV rules could have a substantial adverse effect on our sales volumes and profits. We are concerned that the market and infrastructure in California may not support the large volume of advanced-technology vehicles that manufacturers will be required to produce, especially if gasoline prices remain relatively low. We also are concerned about enforcement of the ZEV mandate in other states that have adopted California’s ZEV program, where the existence of a market for such vehicles is even less certain. CARB conducts periodic reviews of its upcoming ZEV requirements, taking into account factors such as technology developments and market acceptance. Ford and the industry will be active participants in such reviews, with the goal of ensuring that ZEV requirements are feasible and not excessively burdensome. European Requirements. European Union (“EU”) directives and related legislation limit the amount of regulated pollutants that may be emitted by new motor vehicles and engines sold in the EU. Stringent new Stage 6 emission standards took effect for vehicle registrations starting in September 2014, with a second phase beginning in September 2017. These standards will drive the need for additional diesel exhaust after-treatment, which will add cost and potentially impact the diesel CO2 advantage. The European Commission has also proposed new Real Driving Emission (RDE) rules, which will require manufacturers to conduct on-road emission tests using portable emission analyzers. These on-road emission tests will complement the laboratory-based tests. During the initial phase, which started in January 2016, the RDE tests are used for monitoring purposes. Beginning in September 2017, manufacturers will have to reduce the divergence between the regulatory limit that is tested in laboratory conditions and the values of RDE tests (“conformity factors”). The additional costs associated with conducting the RDE tests and complying with the conformity factors are expected to be significant. Other National Requirements. Many countries, in an effort to address air quality concerns, are adopting previous versions of European or United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (“UN-ECE”) mobile source emission regulations. Some countries have adopted more advanced regulations based on the most recent version of European or U.S. regulations; for example, China adopted emission regulations for large cities based on European Stage V emission standards. Korea and Taiwan have adopted very stringent U.S.-based standards for gasoline vehicles and Europeanbased standards for diesel vehicles. Although these countries have adopted regulations based on UN-ECE or U.S. standards, there may be some unique testing provisions that require emission-control systems to be redesigned for Item 1. Business (Continued) 8 these markets. Canadian criteria emissions regulations are aligned with U.S. Tier 2 requirements. In July 2015, the Canadian federal government amended the On-Road Vehicle and Engine Emission Regulations and the Sulphur in Gasoline Regulations to align Canadian emission standards with the U.S. Tier 3 regulations discussed above. Not all countries have adopted appropriate fuel quality standards to accompany the stringent emission standards adopted. This could lead to compliance problems, particularly if on-board diagnostic or in-use surveillance requirements are implemented. Brazil and Chile have introduced stringent emission and on-board diagnostic standards based on the European Stage 5 standards for light duty vehicles and Stage V standards for heavy duty vehicles. In Brazil, more stringent on-board diagnostic standards for diesel light duty vehicles will be introduced in 2017. Argentina is phasing in European Stage 5 standards for all new light duty vehicle registrations by 2017 and European Stage V standards for heavy duty vehicles by 2018. Global Developments. In September 2015, the EPA and CARB announced that they were investigating a major competitor in connection with its alleged use of “defeat devices” in hundreds of thousands of light-duty diesel vehicles. The announcement triggered similar investigations of the competitor by regulators in other countries. Defeat devices are elements of design (typically embedded in software) that improperly cause the emission control system to function less effectively during normal on-road driving than during an official laboratory emissions test, without justification. They are prohibited by law in many jurisdictions, including the United States and Europe. We do not use defeat devices in our vehicles. The investigations by the EPA and CARB of our competitor have led to increased scrutiny of automakers’ emission testing by regulators around the world. The EPA began carrying out additional non-standard tests as part of its vehicle certification program, following an announcement in September 2015. The EU accelerated efforts to finalize its RDE testing program as described above. Several European countries, including France and Germany, are conducting nonstandard emission tests and meeting with manufacturers to discuss the results. Vehicle Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Standards U.S. Requirements – Light Duty Vehicles. Federal law requires that light duty vehicles meet minimum corporate average fuel economy (“CAFE”) standards set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (“NHTSA”). Manufacturers are subject to substantial civil penalties if they fail to meet the CAFE standard in any model year, after taking into account all available credits for the preceding three model years and expected credits for the five succeeding model years. The law requires NHTSA to promulgate and enforce separate CAFE standards applicable to each manufacturer’s fleet of domestic passenger cars, imported passenger cars, and light duty trucks. The EPA also regulates vehicle greenhouse gas (“GHG”) emissions under the Clean Air Act. Because the vast majority of GHGs emitted by a vehicle are the result of fuel combustion, GHG emission standards effectively are fuel economy standards. Thus, it is necessary for NHTSA and EPA to coordinate with each other on their fuel economy and GHG standards, respectively, to avoid potential inconsistencies. In 2010, EPA and NHTSA jointly promulgated regulations establishing the “One National Program” of CAFE and GHG regulations for light duty vehicles for the 2012-2016 model years. In 2012, EPA and NHTSA jointly promulgated regulations extending the One National Program framework through the 2025 model year. These rules require manufacturers to achieve, across the industry, a light duty fleet average fuel economy of approximately 35.5 mpg by the 2016 model year, 45 mpg by the 2021 model year, and 54.5 mpg by the 2025 model year. Each manufacturer’s specific task depends on the mix of vehicles it sells. The rules include the opportunity for manufacturers to earn credits for technologies that achieve real-world CO2 reductions, and fuel economy improvements that are not captured by EPA fuel economy test procedures. Manufacturers also can earn credits for GHG reductions not specifically tied to fuel economy, such as improvements in air conditioning systems. The One National Program standards become increasingly stringent over time, and they will be difficult to meet if fuel prices remain relatively low and market conditions do not drive consumers to purchase electric vehicles and other highly fuel-efficient vehicles in large numbers. The rules provide for a midterm evaluation process under which, by 2018, EPA and NHTSA will re-evaluate their standards for model years 2022–2025 in order to ensure that those standards are feasible and optimal in light of intervening events. We are particularly concerned about the commercial feasibility of meeting the 2022–2025 model year GHG and CAFE standards, and therefore the midterm evaluation process is very important to Ford and the auto industry. Ford’s ability to comply with the 2022–2025 model year standards remains unclear because of the many unknowns regarding technology development, market conditions, and other factors so far Item 1. Business (Continued) 9 into the future. We intend to be an active participant in the midterm evaluation process for these standards. Our concern about the feasibility of the fuel economy and GHG standards also extends to some of the pre-2022 model year standards, which are not covered by the midterm evaluation. If the agencies seek to impose and enforce fuel economy and GHG standards that are misaligned with market conditions, we likely would be forced to take various actions that could have substantial adverse effects on our sales volume and profits. Such actions likely would include restricting offerings of selected engines and popular options; increasing market support programs for our most fuel-efficient cars and light trucks; and ultimately curtailing the production and sale of certain vehicles such as high-performance cars, utilities, and/or full-size light trucks, in order to maintain compliance. California has asserted the right to regulate motor vehicle GHG emissions, and other states have asserted the right to adopt the California standards. With the adoption of the federal One National Program standards discussed above, California and the other states have agreed that compliance with the federal program would satisfy compliance with any purported state GHG requirements for the 2012–2025 model years. This avoids a patchwork of potentially conflicting federal and state GHG standards. Should California and other states ever renew their efforts to enforce state-specific motor vehicle GHG rules, this would impose significant costs on automotive manufacturers. U.S. Requirements – Heavy Duty Vehicles. EPA and NHTSA have jointly promulgated GHG and fuel economy standards on heavy duty vehicles (generally, vehicles over 8,500 pounds gross vehicle weight rating). In our case, the standards primarily affect our heavy duty pickup trucks and vans, plus vocational vehicles such as shuttle buses and delivery trucks. EPA and NHTSA are expected to finalize new rules in 2016 setting GHG and fuel economy standards for these vehicles, covering model years 2019–2027. As the heavy-duty standards increase in stringency, it may become more difficult to comply while continuing to offer a full lineup of heavy duty trucks. European Requirements. In December 2008, the EU approved regulation of passenger car CO2 emissions beginning in 2012 that limits the industry fleet average to a maximum of 130 grams per kilometer (“g/km”), using a sliding scale based on vehicle weight. This regulation provides different targets for each manufacturer based on the respective average vehicle weight for its fleet of vehicles. Limited credits are available for CO2 off-cycle actions (“eco-innovations”), certain alternative fuels, and vehicles with CO2 emissions below 50 g/km. A penalty system will apply for manufacturers failing to meet targets, with fees ranging from €5 to €95 per vehicle per g/km shortfall in the years 2012–2018, and €95 per g/km shortfall beginning in 2019. Pooling agreements between different manufacturers are possible, although it is not clear that these will be of much practical benefit under the regulations. Starting in 2020, an industry target of 95 g/km has been set. Other non-EU European countries are likely to follow with similar regulations. For example, Switzerland has introduced similar rules, which began phasing-in starting in July 2012 with the same targets (which likely also will include a 2020 target of 95 g/km), although the industry average emission target is significantly higher. We face the risk of advance premium payment requirements if, for example, unexpected market fluctuation within a quarter negatively impact our average fleet performance. In separate legislation, “complementary measures” have been mandated, including requirements related to fuel economy indicators, and more-efficient low-CO2 mobile air conditioning systems. The EU Commission, Council and Parliament have approved a target for commercial light duty vehicles to be at an industry average of 175 g/km (with phase-in from 2014–2017), and 147 g/km in 2020; it is likely that other European countries, like Switzerland, will implement similar rules but under even more difficult conditions. This regulation also provides different targets for each manufacturer based on its respective average vehicle weight in its fleet of vehicles. The final mass and CO2 requirements for “multi-stage vehicles” (e.g., our Transit chassis cabs) are fully allocated to the base manufacturer (e.g., Ford) so that the base manufacturer is fully responsible for the CO2 performance of the final up-fitted vehicles. The EU proposal also includes a penalty system, “super-credits” for vehicles below 50 g/km, and limited credits for CO2 off-cycle ecoinnovations, pooling, etc., similar to the passenger car CO2 regulation. The United Nations has a project underway to develop a new technical regulation for passenger car emissions and CO2. This new world light duty test procedure (“WLTP”) is focused primarily on better aligning laboratory CO2 and fuel consumption figures with customer-reported figures. The introduction of WLTP in Europe is likely to require updates to CO2 labeling as early as 2018 and could increase certain consumer label values. Costs associated with new or incremental testing for WLTP could be significant. The European Commission continues to apply political pressure for mandatory WLTP testing for regulated emissions and CO2 starting in September 2017. The European Commission has assured equivalent stringency to the existing fleet average rules for each automobile manufacturer if the 2020 fleet average targets are required to be measured on WLTP instead of under the current European New European Driving Cycle (“NEDC”) requirements. Item 1. Business (Continued) 10 Some European countries have implemented or are considering other initiatives for reducing CO2 vehicle emissions, including fiscal measures and CO2 labeling. For example, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Spain, Portugal, and the Netherlands, among others, have introduced taxation based on CO2 emissions. The EU CO2 requirements are likely to trigger further measures. To limit GHG emissions, the EU directive on mobile air conditioning currently requires the replacement of the current refrigerant with a lower “global warming potential” refrigerant for new vehicle types, and for all newly registered vehicles starting in January 2017. A refrigerant change adds considerable costs along the whole manufacturing chain. Other National Requirements. The Canadian federal government has regulated vehicle GHG emissions under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, beginning with the 2011 model year. The standards track the U.S. EPA GHG regulations for the 2012–2016 model years. In October 2014, the Canadian federal government published the final changes to the regulation for light duty vehicles, which maintain alignment with U.S. EPA vehicle GHG standards for the 2017–2025 model years. The final regulation for 2014–2018 heavy duty vehicles was published in February 2013. In October 2014, the Canadian federal government published the Notice of Intent to regulate heavy duty vehicles and engines for model year 2019 and beyond, which tracks U.S. EPA standards. Mexico adopted fuel economy/CO2 standards, based on the U.S. One National Program framework, that took effect in 2014. Many Asia Pacific countries (such as Australia, China, India, South Korea, Taiwan, and Vietnam) are developing or enforcing fuel efficiency or labeling targets. For example, South Korea has set fuel efficiency targets for 2020, with incentives for early adoption. China published standards for Stage IV fuel efficiency targets for 2016–2020. The fuel efficiency targets will impact the cost of vehicle technology in the future. In South America, Brazil introduced a voluntary vehicle energy-efficiency labeling program, indicating fuel consumption rates for all light-duty vehicles. Brazil has required inclusion of emission classification on fuel economy labels since January 2016. Brazil also published a new automotive regime establishing a minimum absolute CAFE value as a function of Fleet Corporate Average Mass for 2017 light duty vehicles with a spark ignition engine in order to qualify for industrialized products tax reduction. Additional tax reductions are available if further fuel efficiency improvements are achieved. A severe penalty system will apply to qualified manufacturers failing to meet fuel efficiency requirements for the 2013–2017 sales period. Brazil reduced import tax on electric and hybrid cars. The tax rate, which was 35%, will vary from zero to 7%, depending on a vehicle’s energy efficiency. Chile introduced a tax based on urban fuel consumption and NOx emission for light and medium vehicles beginning in late 2014. In general, fuel efficiency targets may impact the cost of technology of our models in the future. In the Middle East, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia introduced new light duty vehicle fuel economy standards, which are patterned after the U.S. CAFE standard structure, with fuel economy targets following the design of the U.S. 2012–2016 fuel economy standards. The standards became effective on January 1, 2016 and will be fully phased in by the end of 2017. Vehicle Safety U.S. Requirements. The National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (the “Safety Act”) regulates vehicles and vehicle equipment in two primary ways. First, the Safety Act prohibits the sale in the United States of any new vehicle or equipment that does not conform to applicable vehicle safety standards established by NHTSA. Meeting or exceeding many safety standards is costly, in part because the standards tend to conflict with the need to reduce vehicle weight in order to meet emission and fuel economy standards. Second, the Safety Act requires that defects related to motor vehicle safety be remedied through safety recall campaigns. A manufacturer is obligated to recall vehicles if it determines the vehicles do not comply with a safety standard. Should we or NHTSA determine that either a safety defect or noncompliance issue exists with respect to any of our vehicles, the cost of such recall campaigns could be substantial. Other National Requirements. The EU and many countries have established vehicle safety standards and regulations, and are likely to adopt additional or more stringent requirements in the future. The European General Safety Regulation introduced United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (“UN-ECE”) regulations, which will be required for the European Type Approval process. EU regulators also are focusing on active safety features such as lane departure warning systems, electronic stability control, and automatic brake assist. Globally, governments generally have been adopting UN-ECE based regulations with minor variations to address local concerns. Any difference between North American and UN-ECE based regulations can add complexity and costs to the development of global platform vehicles, and we continue to support efforts to harmonize regulations to reduce vehicle design complexity while providing a common level of safety performance; several recently launched bilateral negotiations on free trade can potentially contribute to this goal. New safety and recall requirements in China, India, and Gulf Cooperation Council countries also Item 1. Business (Continued) 11 may add substantial costs and complexity to our global recall practice. In South America, additional safety requirements are being introduced or proposed in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, and Uruguay, influenced by The New Car Assessment Programme for Latin America and the Caribbean (“Latin NCAP”), which may be a driver for similar actions in other countries. In Canada, regulatory requirements are currently aligned with U.S. regulations. However, recent amendments to the Canadian Motor Vehicle Safety Act have introduced broad powers to the Minister of Transport to order manufacturers to submit a notice of defect or non-compliance when the Minister considers it would be in the interest of safety. ENGINEERING, RESEARCH, AND DEVELOPMENT We engage in engineering, research, and development primarily to improve the performance (including fuel efficiency), safety, and customer satisfaction of our products, and to develop new products. Engineering, research, and development expenses for 2015, 2014, and 2013 were $6.7 billion, $6.7 billion, and $6.2 billion, respectively. 12 ITEM 1A. Risk Factors. We have listed below (not necessarily in order of importance or probability of occurrence) the most significant risk factors applicable to us: Decline in industry sales volume, particularly in the United States, Europe, or China, due to financial crisis, recession, geopolitical events, or other factors. Because we, like other manufacturers, have a high proportion of relatively fixed structural costs, relatively small changes in industry sales volume can have a substantial effect on our cash flow and profitability. If industry vehicle sales were to decline to levels significantly below our planning assumption, particularly in the United States, Europe, or China, due to financial crisis, recession, geopolitical events, or other factors, such as occurred during 2008 and 2009, our financial condition and results of operations would be substantially adversely affected. For discussion of economic trends, see the “Overview” section of Item 7. Decline in Ford’s market share or failure to achieve growth. To maintain competitive economies of scale and grow our global market share, we must grow our market share in fast-growing newly developed and emerging markets, particularly in our Asia Pacific region and our Middle East & Africa region, as well as maintain or grow market share in mature markets. Our market share in certain growing markets, such as China, is lower than it is in our mature markets. A significant decline in our market share in mature markets or failure to achieve growth in newly developing or emerging markets, whether due to capacity constraints, competitive pressures, protectionist trade policies, or other factors, could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Lower-than-anticipated market acceptance of Ford’s new or existing products or services. Although we conduct extensive market research before launching new or refreshed vehicles and introducing new services, many factors both within and outside our control affect the success of new or existing products and services in the marketplace. Offering vehicles and services that customers want and value can mitigate the risks of increasing price competition and declining demand, but products and services that are perceived to be less desirable (whether in terms of price, quality, styling, safety, overall value, fuel efficiency, or other attributes) can exacerbate these risks. The success of Ford Smart Mobility, our plan for connectivity, mobility, autonomous vehicles, the customer experience, and data and analytics, likewise depends on many factors, including the amount of capital we invest, advancements in technology, regulatory changes, and other factors that are difficult to predict that may significantly affect the future of mobility. With increased consumer interconnectedness through the internet, social media, and other media, mere allegations relating to quality, safety, fuel efficiency, corporate social responsibility, or other key attributes can negatively impact our reputation or market acceptance of our products or services, even where such allegations prove to be inaccurate or unfounded. Market shift away from sales of larger, more profitable vehicles beyond Ford’s current planning assumption, particularly in the United States. A shift in consumer preferences away from larger, more profitable vehicles at levels beyond our current planning assumption could result in an immediate and substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. Although we have a balanced portfolio of small, medium, and large cars, utilities, and trucks with competitive fuel efficiency, a shift in consumer preferences away from sales of larger, more profitable vehicles at levels greater than our current planning assumption—whether because of spiking fuel prices, a decline in the construction industry, government actions or incentives, or other reasons—still could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. An increase in or continued volatility of fuel prices, or reduced availability of fuel. An increase in fuel prices, continued price volatility, or reduced availability of fuel, particularly in the United States, could result in weakening of demand for relatively more-profitable large cars, utilities, and trucks, while increasing demand for relatively lessprofitable small vehicles. Continuation or acceleration of such a trend beyond our current planning assumption, or volatility in demand across segments, could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 13 Continued or increased price competition resulting from industry excess capacity, currency fluctuations, or other factors. The global automotive industry is intensely competitive, with manufacturing capacity far exceeding current demand. According to the December 2015 report issued by IHS Automotive, the global automotive industry is estimated to have had excess capacity of about 31 million units in 2015. Industry overcapacity has resulted in many manufacturers offering marketing incentives on vehicles in an attempt to maintain and grow market share; these incentives historically have included a combination of subsidized financing or leasing programs, price rebates, and other incentives. As a result, we are not necessarily able to set our prices to offset higher costs of marketing incentives, commodity or other cost increases, or the impact of adverse currency fluctuations, including pricing advantages foreign competitors may have because of their weaker home market currencies. Continuation of or increased excess capacity could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates. As a resourceintensive manufacturing operation, we are exposed to a variety of market and asset risks, including the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates. These risks affect our Automotive and Financial Services sectors. We monitor and manage these exposures as an integral part of our overall risk management program, which recognizes the unpredictability of markets and seeks to reduce potentially adverse effects on our business. Nevertheless, changes in currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates cannot always be predicted or hedged. In addition, because of intense price competition and our high level of fixed costs, we may not be able to address such changes even if foreseeable. As a result, substantial unfavorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, or interest rates could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. See “Overview” to Item 7 and Item 7A for additional discussion of currency, commodity price, and interest rate risks. Adverse effects resulting from economic, geopolitical, or other events. With the increasing interconnectedness of global economic and financial systems, a financial crisis, natural disaster, geopolitical crisis, or other significant event in one area of the world can have an immediate and devastating impact on markets around the world. For example, the financial crisis that began in the United States in 2008 quickly spread to other markets; natural disasters in Japan and Thailand during 2011 caused production interruptions and delays not just in Asia Pacific but other regions around the world; and episodes of increased geopolitical tensions or acts of terrorism have at times caused adverse reactions that may spread to economies around the globe. Concerns persist regarding the sustainability of the European currency area (“euro area”) and of the larger European Union, which includes the United Kingdom. The pending decision by the U.K. electorate on whether to remain in the European Union has exacerbated concerns regarding the overall stability of the European Union, given the diverse economic and political circumstances of individual euro area countries. If a country within the euro area were to default on its debt or withdraw from the euro currency, or—in a more extreme circumstance—the euro currency were to be dissolved entirely, the impact on markets around the world, and on Ford’s global business, could be immediate and significant. The exit of the United Kingdom from the European Union would have less extreme but still significant implications. Such scenarios—or the perception that such developments are imminent—could adversely affect the value of our euro- and pound-denominated assets and obligations. In addition, such developments could cause financial and capital markets within and outside Europe to constrict, thereby negatively impacting our ability to finance our business, and also could cause a substantial dip in consumer confidence and spending that could negatively impact sales of vehicles. Any one of these impacts could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. In addition, we have operations in various markets with volatile economic or political environments and are pursuing growth opportunities in a number of newly developed and emerging markets. These investments may expose us to heightened risks of economic, geopolitical, or other events, including governmental takeover (i.e., nationalization) of our manufacturing facilities or intellectual property, restrictive exchange or import controls, disruption of operations as a result of systemic political or economic instability, outbreak of war or expansion of hostilities, and acts of terrorism, each of which could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Further, the U.S. government, other governments and international organizations could impose additional sanctions that could restrict us from doing business directly or indirectly in or with certain countries or parties, which could include affiliates. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 14 Economic distress of suppliers that may require Ford to provide substantial financial support or take other measures to ensure supplies of components or materials and could increase costs, affect liquidity, or cause production constraints or disruptions. The automotive industry supply base experienced increased economic distress due to the sudden and substantial drop in industry sales volumes beginning in 2008. Dramatically lower industry sales volume made existing debt obligations and fixed cost levels difficult for many suppliers to manage, increasing pressure on the supply base. As a result, suppliers not only were less willing to reduce prices, but some requested direct or indirect price increases as well as new and shorter payment terms. At times, we have had to provide financial assistance to key suppliers to ensure an uninterrupted supply of materials and components. In addition, suppliers may continue to exit certain lines of business or close facilities due to economic concerns, management turnover, or other reasons. In such cases, we generally experience additional costs associated with transitioning to new suppliers. Each of these factors could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Work stoppages at Ford or supplier facilities or other limitations on production (whether as a result of labor disputes, natural or man-made disasters, tight credit markets or other financial distress, production constraints or difficulties, or other factors). A work stoppage or other limitation on production could occur at Ford or supplier facilities for any number of reasons, including as a result of disputes under existing collective bargaining agreements with labor unions or in connection with negotiation of new collective bargaining agreements, or as a result of supplier financial distress or other production constraints or difficulties, or for other reasons. Recent examples of situations that have affected industry production to varying degrees include: supplier financial distress due to reduced production volumes during the economic downturn in 2008–2009; capacity constraints as suppliers that restructured or downsized during the downturn work to satisfy growing industry volumes; short-term constraints on production as consumer preferences shift more fluidly across vehicle segments and features; and the impact on certain suppliers of natural disasters during 2011. As indicated, a work stoppage or other limitations on production at Ford or supplier facilities for any reason (including but not limited to labor disputes, natural or man-made disasters, tight credit markets or other financial distress, or production constraints or difficulties) could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Single-source supply of components or materials. Many components used in our vehicles are available only from a single supplier and cannot be re-sourced quickly or inexpensively to another supplier (due to long lead times, new contractual commitments that may be required by another supplier before ramping up to provide the components or materials, etc.). In addition to the general risks described above regarding interruption of supplies, which are exacerbated in the case of single-source suppliers, the exclusive supplier of a key component potentially could exert significant bargaining power over price, quality, warranty claims, or other terms relating to a component. Labor or other constraints on Ford’s ability to maintain competitive cost structure. Substantially all of the hourly employees in our Automotive operations in the United States and Canada are represented by unions and covered by collective bargaining agreements. We negotiated a four-year agreement with the UAW in 2015 and will negotiate a new agreement with Unifor (formerly the Canadian Auto Workers Union) in 2016. Although we have negotiated transformational agreements in recent years, these agreements provide guaranteed wage and benefit levels throughout the contract term and some degree of income security, subject to certain conditions. As a practical matter, these agreements may restrict our ability to close plants and divest businesses. A substantial number of our employees in other regions are represented by unions or government councils, and legislation or custom promoting retention of manufacturing or other employment in the state, country, or region may constrain as a practical matter our ability to sell or close manufacturing or other facilities. Substantial pension and postretirement health care and life insurance liabilities impairing liquidity or financial condition. We have defined benefit retirement plans in the United States that cover many of our hourly and salaried employees. We also provide pension benefits to non-U.S. employees and retirees, primarily in Europe. In addition, we and certain of our subsidiaries sponsor plans to provide other postretirement benefits (“OPEB”) for retired employees (primarily health care and life insurance benefits). See Note 12 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for more information about these plans. These benefit plans impose significant liabilities on us that are not fully funded and will require additional cash contributions, which could impair our liquidity. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 15 Our qualified U.S. defined benefit pension plans are subject to Title IV of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”). Under Title IV of ERISA, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (“PBGC”) has the authority under certain circumstances or upon the occurrence of certain events to terminate a qualified underfunded pension plan. One such circumstance is the occurrence of an event that unreasonably increases the risk of unreasonably large losses to the PBGC. Although we believe it is unlikely that the PBGC would terminate any of our plans, in the event that our qualified U.S. pension plans were terminated at a time when the liabilities of the plans exceeded the assets of the plans, we would incur a liability to the PBGC that could be equal to the entire amount of the underfunding. If our cash flows and capital resources were insufficient to fund our pension or OPEB obligations, we could be forced to reduce or delay investments and capital expenditures, suspend dividend payments, seek additional capital, or restructure or refinance our indebtedness. Worse-than-assumed economic and demographic experience for postretirement benefit plans (e.g., discount rates or investment returns). The measurement of our obligations, costs, and liabilities associated with benefits pursuant to our postretirement benefit plans requires that we estimate the present value of projected future payments to all participants. We use many assumptions in calculating these estimates, including assumptions related to discount rates, investment returns on designated plan assets, and demographic experience (e.g., mortality and retirement rates). To the extent actual results are less favorable than our assumptions, there could be a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. For discussion of our assumptions, see “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 and Note 12 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. Restriction on use of tax attributes from tax law “ownership change.” Section 382 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code restricts the ability of a corporation that undergoes an ownership change to use its tax attributes, including net operating losses and tax credits (“Tax Attributes”). At December 31, 2015, we had Tax Attributes that would offset more than $15 billion of taxable income. For these purposes, an ownership change occurs if 5 percent shareholders of an issuer’s outstanding common stock, collectively, increase their ownership percentage by more than 50 percentage points over a rolling three-year period. In 2015, we renewed for an additional three-year period our tax benefit preservation plan (the “Plan”) to reduce the risk of an ownership change under Section 382. Under the Plan, shares held by any person who acquires, without the approval of our Board of Directors, beneficial ownership of 4.99% or more of our outstanding Common Stock could be subject to significant dilution. The renewal is subject to shareholder approval at our annual meeting in May 2016. The discovery of defects in vehicles resulting in delays in new model launches, recall campaigns, or increased warranty costs. Meeting or exceeding many government-mandated safety standards is costly and often technologically challenging, especially where standards may be in tension with the need to reduce vehicle weight in order to meet government-mandated emissions and fuel-economy standards. Government safety standards also require manufacturers to remedy defects related to vehicle safety through safety recall campaigns, and a manufacturer is obligated to recall vehicles if it determines that the vehicles do not comply with a safety standard. In addition, the introduction of new and innovative features and technology to our vehicles could increase the risk of defects or customer dissatisfaction. In 2014 and 2015, there was an unprecedented increase in the number of vehicles involved in safety recalls by manufacturers in the United States. The increase reflects NHTSA’s continued expansion of its definition of safety defects under the Safety Act. In addition, NHTSA’s enforcement strategy shifted to a significant increase in civil penalties levied and the use of consent orders requiring direct oversight by NHTSA of certain manufacturers’ safety processes, a trend that could continue. Should we or government safety regulators determine that a safety or other defect or a noncompliance exists with respect to certain of our vehicles prior to the start of production, the launch of such vehicle could be delayed until such defect is remedied. The costs associated with any protracted delay in new model launches necessary to remedy such defects, or the cost of recall campaigns or warranty costs to remedy such defects in vehicles that have been sold, could be substantial. These recall and warranty costs could be exacerbated to the extent they relate to global platforms. Furthermore, launch delays or recall actions also could adversely affect our reputation or market acceptance of our products as discussed above under “Lower-thananticipated market acceptance of Ford’s new or existing products or services.” Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 16 Increased safety, emissions, fuel economy, or other regulations resulting in higher costs, cash expenditures, and/or sales restrictions. The worldwide automotive industry is governed by a substantial amount of government regulation, which often differs by state, region, and country. Government regulation has arisen, and proposals for additional regulation are advanced, primarily out of concern for the environment (including concerns about the possibility of global climate change and its impact), vehicle safety, and energy independence. For example, as discussed above under “Item 1. Business - Governmental Standards,” in the United States the CAFE standards for light duty vehicles are 35.5 mpg by the 2016 model year, 45 mpg by the 2021 model year, and 54.5 mpg by the 2025 model year; EPA’s parallel CO2 emission regulations impose similar standards. California’s ZEV rules also mandate steep increases in the sale of electric vehicles and other advanced technology vehicles beginning in the 2018 model year. In addition, many governments regulate local product content and/or impose import requirements as a means of creating jobs, protecting domestic producers, and influencing the balance of payments. In recent years, we have made significant changes to our product cycle plan to improve the overall fuel economy of vehicles we produce, thereby reducing their GHG emissions. There are limits on our ability to achieve fuel economy improvements over a given time frame, however, primarily relating to the cost and effectiveness of available technologies, consumer acceptance of new technologies and changes in vehicle mix, willingness of consumers to absorb the additional costs of new technologies, the appropriateness (or lack thereof) of certain technologies for use in particular vehicles, the widespread availability (or lack thereof) of supporting infrastructure for new technologies, and the human, engineering, and financial resources necessary to deploy new technologies across a wide range of products and powertrains in a short time. The current fuel economy, CO2, and ZEV standards will be difficult to meet if fuel prices remain relatively low and market conditions do not drive consumers to purchase electric vehicles and other highly fuel-efficient vehicles in large numbers. The U.S. government has initiated an enforcement action against a major competitor in connection with its alleged use of “defeat devices” in hundreds of thousands of light duty diesel vehicles. The emergence of this issue has led to increased scrutiny of automaker emission testing by regulators around the world. This may lead to new regulations, more stringent enforcement programs, requests for field actions, and/or delays in regulatory approvals. The cost to comply with existing government regulations is substantial and additional regulations or changes in consumer preferences that affect vehicle mix could have a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. For more discussion of the impact of such standards on our global business, see the “Governmental Standards” discussion in “Item 1. Business” above. In addition, a number of governments, as well as nongovernmental organizations, publicly assess vehicles to their own protocols. The protocols could change aggressively, and any negative perception regarding the performance of our vehicles subjected to such tests could reduce future sales. Unusual or significant litigation, governmental investigations, or adverse publicity arising out of alleged defects in products, perceived environmental impacts, or otherwise. We spend substantial resources ensuring that we comply with governmental safety regulations, mobile and stationary source emissions regulations, and other standards. Compliance with governmental standards, however, does not necessarily prevent individual or class actions, which can entail significant cost and risk. In certain circumstances, courts may permit tort claims even where our vehicles comply with federal and/or other applicable law. Furthermore, simply responding to actual or threatened litigation or government investigations of our compliance with regulatory standards, whether related to our products or business or commercial relationships, may require significant expenditures of time and other resources. Litigation also is inherently uncertain, and we could experience significant adverse results. In addition, adverse publicity surrounding an allegation may cause significant reputational harm that could have a significant adverse effect on our sales. A change in requirements under long-term supply arrangements committing Ford to purchase minimum or fixed quantities of certain parts, or to pay a minimum amount to the seller (“take-or-pay” contracts). We have entered into a number of long-term supply contracts that require us to purchase a fixed quantity of parts to be used in the production of our vehicles. If our need for any of these parts were to lessen, we could still be required to purchase a specified quantity of the part or pay a minimum amount to the seller pursuant to the take-or-pay contract, which could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 17 Adverse effects on results from a decrease in or cessation or clawback of government incentives related to investments. We receive economic benefits from national, state, and local governments in various regions of the world in the form of incentives designed to encourage manufacturers to establish, maintain, or increase investment, workforce, or production. These incentives may take various forms, including grants, loan subsidies, and tax abatements or credits. The impact of these incentives can be significant in a particular market during a reporting period. For example, most of our manufacturing facilities in South America are located in Brazil, where the state or federal governments have historically offered, and continue to offer, significant incentives to manufacturers to encourage capital investment, increase manufacturing production, and create jobs. As a result, the performance of our South American operations has been impacted favorably by government incentives to a substantial extent. In Brazil, however, the federal government has levied assessments against us concerning our calculation of federal incentives we received, and certain states have challenged the grant to us of tax incentives by the state of Bahia, including a constitutional challenge of state incentives that is pending in Brazil’s Supreme Court. A decrease in, expiration without renewal of, or other cessation or clawback of government incentives for any of our business units, as a result of administrative decision or otherwise, could have a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for discussion of our accounting for government incentives, and “Item 3. Legal Proceedings” for a discussion of tax proceedings in Brazil and the potential requirement for us to post collateral. Inherent limitations of internal controls impacting financial statements and safeguarding of assets. Our internal control over financial reporting and our operating internal controls may not prevent or detect misstatements or loss of assets because of inherent limitations, including the possibility of human error, the circumvention or overriding of controls, or fraud. Effective internal controls can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement accuracy and safeguarding of assets. Cybersecurity risks to operational systems, security systems, or infrastructure owned by Ford, Ford Credit, or a third-party vendor or supplier. We are at risk for interruptions, outages, and breaches of: (i) operational systems (including business, financial, accounting, product development, consumer receivables, data processing, or manufacturing processes); (ii) facility security systems; and/or (iii) in-vehicle systems or mobile devices. Such cyber incidents could materially disrupt operational systems; result in loss of trade secrets or other proprietary or competitively sensitive information; compromise personally identifiable information of customers, employees, or others; jeopardize the security of our facilities; and/or affect the performance of in-vehicle systems. A cyber incident could be caused by malicious third parties using sophisticated, targeted methods to circumvent firewalls, encryption, and other security defenses, including hacking, fraud, trickery, or other forms of deception. The techniques used by third parties change frequently and may be difficult to detect for long periods of time. A significant cyber incident could impact production capability, harm our reputation and/or subject us to regulatory actions or litigation. Failure of financial institutions to fulfill commitments under committed credit and liquidity facilities. Under our Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of April 30, 2015 and as further amended (the “revolving credit facility”), we are able to borrow, repay, and then re-borrow up to $13.4 billion. Certain of our subsidiaries have standby or revolving credit facilities on which they depend for liquidity. If the financial institutions that provide commitments under the revolving credit facility, our subsidiaries’ standby or revolving credit facilities, or other committed credit facilities were to default on their obligation to fund the commitments, these facilities would not be available to us, which could substantially adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition. For discussion of our Credit Agreement, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” in Item 7 and Note 13 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 18 Inability of Ford Credit to access debt, securitization, or derivative markets around the world at competitive rates or in sufficient amounts, due to credit rating downgrades, market volatility, market disruption, regulatory requirements, or other factors. Ford Credit’s ability to obtain unsecured funding at a reasonable cost is dependent on its credit ratings or its perceived creditworthiness. Ford Credit’s ability to obtain securitized funding under its committed asset-backed liquidity programs and certain other asset-backed securitization transactions is subject to having a sufficient amount of assets eligible for these programs, as well as Ford Credit’s ability to obtain appropriate credit ratings and, for certain committed programs, derivatives to manage the interest rate risk. Over time, and particularly in the event of any credit rating downgrades, market volatility, market disruption, or other factors, Ford Credit may reduce the amount of receivables it purchases or originates because of funding constraints. In addition, Ford Credit may be limited in the amount of receivables it purchases or originates in certain countries or regions if the local capital markets, particularly in developing countries, do not exist or are not adequately developed. Similarly, Ford Credit may reduce the amount of receivables it purchases or originates if there is a significant decline in the demand for the types of securities it offers or Ford Credit is unable to obtain derivatives to manage the interest rate risk associated with its securitization transactions. A significant reduction in the amount of receivables Ford Credit purchases or originates would significantly reduce its ongoing profits and could adversely affect its ability to support the sale of Ford vehicles. Higher-than-expected credit losses, lower-than-anticipated residual values, or higher-than-expected return volumes for leased vehicles. Credit risk is the possibility of loss from a customer’s or dealer’s failure to make payments according to contract terms. Credit risk (which is heavily dependent upon economic factors including unemployment, consumer debt service burden, personal income growth, dealer profitability, and used car prices) has a significant impact on Ford Credit’s business. The level of credit losses Ford Credit may experience could exceed its expectations and adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations. In addition, Ford Credit projects expected residual values (including residual value support payments from Ford) and return volumes for the vehicles it leases. Actual proceeds realized by Ford Credit upon the sale of returned leased vehicles at lease termination may be lower than the amount projected, which would reduce the profitability of the lease transaction. Among the factors that can affect the value of returned lease vehicles are the volume of vehicles returned, economic conditions, and quality or perceived quality, safety, fuel efficiency, or reliability of the vehicles. Actual return volumes may be higher than expected and can be influenced by contractual lease-end values relative to auction values, marketing programs for new vehicles, and general economic conditions. Each of these factors, alone or in combination, has the potential to adversely affect Ford Credit’s profitability if actual results were to differ significantly from Ford Credit’s projections. See “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 for additional discussion. Increased competition from banks, financial institutions, or other third parties seeking to increase their share of financing Ford vehicles. No single company is a dominant force in the automotive finance industry. Most of Ford Credit’s bank competitors in the United States use credit aggregation systems that permit dealers to send, through standardized systems, retail credit applications to multiple finance sources to evaluate financing options offered by these sources. Also, direct on-line or large dealer group financing options provide consumers with alternative finance sources and/or increased pricing transparency. All of these financing alternatives drive greater competition based on financing rates and terms. Competition from such institutions and alternative finance sources could adversely affect Ford Credit’s profitability and the volume of its retail business. In addition, Ford Credit may face increased competition on wholesale financing for Ford dealers. New or increased credit regulations, consumer or data protection regulations, or other regulations resulting in higher costs and/or additional financing restrictions. As a finance company, Ford Credit is highly regulated by governmental authorities in the locations in which it operates, which can impose significant additional costs and/or restrictions on its business. In the United States, for example, Ford Credit’s operations are subject to regulation, supervision, and licensing under various federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including the federal Truth-in-Lending Act, Consumer Leasing Act, Equal Credit Opportunity Act, and Fair Credit Reporting Act. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 19 Congress also passed the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (“Dodd-Frank Act”) in 2010 to reform practices in the financial services industries, including automotive financing and securitizations. The Dodd-Frank Act directs federal agencies to adopt rules to regulate the consumer finance industry and the capital markets and, among other things, gives the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (“CFPB”) broad rule-making and enforcement authority for a wide range of consumer financial protection laws that regulate consumer finance businesses, such as Ford Credit’s retail automotive financing business. Exercise of these powers by the CFPB may increase the costs of, impose additional restrictions on, or otherwise adversely affect companies in the automotive finance business. For example, in March 2013, the CFPB issued a bulletin recommending that indirect vehicle lenders, a class that includes Ford Credit, take steps to monitor and/or impose controls over dealer discretionary pricing. Effective August 31, 2015, the CFPB has authority to supervise and examine the largest nonbank automotive finance companies, such as Ford Credit, for compliance with consumer financial protection laws. In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act provides that a nonbank financial company could be designated a “systemically important financial institution” by the Financial Stability Oversight Council and thus be subject to supervision by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Such a designation would mean that a nonbank finance company such as Ford Credit, in effect, could be regulated like a bank with respect to capital and other requirements, but without the benefits of being a bank—such as the ability to offer Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) insured deposits. The Dodd-Frank Act also creates an alternative liquidation framework under which the FDIC may be appointed as receiver of a nonbank financial company if the U.S. Treasury Secretary (in consultation with the President of the United States) determines that the company is in default or danger of default and the resolution of the company under other applicable law (e.g., U.S. bankruptcy law) would have serious adverse effects on the financial stability of the United States. The FDIC’s powers under this framework may vary from those of a bankruptcy court under U.S. bankruptcy law, which could adversely impact securitization markets, including Ford Credit’s funding activities, regardless of whether Ford Credit ever is determined to be subject to the Dodd-Frank Act’s alternative liquidation framework. In some countries outside the United States, some of Ford Credit’s subsidiaries are regulated banking institutions and are required, among other things, to maintain minimum capital and liquidity. In many other locations, governmental authorities require companies to have licenses in order to conduct financing businesses. Compliance with these laws and regulations imposes additional costs on Ford Credit and affects the conduct of its business. Additional regulation could add significant cost or operational constraints that might impair Ford Credit’s profitability. Key Economic Factors and Trends Affecting the Automotive Industry Currency Exchange Rate Volatility. The U.S. Federal Reserve raised its policy interest rate in December 2016, a move which has been accompanied by an upward shift in longer term interest rates since November 2016. The related shifts in capital flows have contributed to downward pressure on both developed and emerging market currencies globally. In some emerging markets, that pressure is aggravated by low commodity prices, high inflation, or unstable policy environments. Additionally, the yen, euro and pound have depreciated as a result of monetary policy easing by the central banks in those markets, as well as ongoing Brexit negotiations in Europe. The weak yen, in particular, adds significant potential downward pressure on vehicle pricing across many markets globally. In most markets, exchange rates are market-determined, and all are impacted by many different macroeconomic and policy factors, and thus likely to remain volatile. However, in some markets, exchange rates are heavily influenced or controlled by governments. Excess Capacity. According to IHS Automotive, an automotive research firm, the estimated automotive industry global production capacity for light vehicles of about 125 million units exceeded global production by about 32 million units in 2016. In North America and Europe, two regions where a significant share of industry revenue is earned, excess capacity as a percent of production was an estimated 7% and 21%, respectively, in 2016. In China, the auto industry also witnessed excess capacity at 48% of production in 2016, as manufacturers compete to capitalize on China’s future market potential. According to production capacity data projected by IHS Automotive, global excess capacity conditions could continue for several years at an average of about 39 million units per year during the period from 2017 to 2021. Pricing Pressure. Excess capacity, coupled with a proliferation of new products being introduced in key segments, will keep pressure on manufacturers’ ability to increase prices. In North America, the industry restructuring of the past few years has allowed manufacturers to better match production with demand, although Japanese and Korean manufacturers also have capacity located outside of the region directed to North America. In the future, Chinese and Indian manufacturers are expected to enter U.S. and European markets, further intensifying competition. Over the long term, intense competition and excess capacity will continue to put downward pressure on inflation-adjusted prices for similarlycontented vehicles in the United States and contribute to a challenging pricing environment for the automotive industry. In Europe, the excess capacity situation was exacerbated by weakening demand and the lack of reductions in existing capacity, such that negative pricing pressure is expected to continue for the foreseeable future. Commodity and Energy Price Changes. The price of oil has increased since late 2016 as oil producing nations agreed to modest output reductions, although the average oil price for the year was below the 2015 level. Other commodity prices have begun to increase as well, with continued volatility likely. Over the longer term, commodity prices are likely to trend higher given expectations for global demand growth. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) 28 Vehicle Profitability. Our financial results depend on the profitability of the vehicles we sell, which may vary significantly by vehicle line. In general, larger vehicles tend to command higher prices and be more profitable than smaller vehicles, both across and within vehicle segments. For example, in North America, our larger, more profitable vehicles had an average contribution margin that was about 135% of our total average contribution margin across all vehicles, whereas our smaller vehicles had significantly lower contribution margins. In addition, government regulations aimed at reducing emissions and increasing fuel efficiency may increase the cost of vehicles by more than the perceived benefit to the consumer. Given the backdrop of excess capacity, these regulations could dampen contribution margins. Trade Policy. To the extent governments in various regions erect or intensify barriers to imports, or implement currency policy that advantages local exporters selling into the global marketplace, there can be a significant negative impact on manufacturers based in markets that promote free trade. While we believe the long-term trend is toward the growth of free trade, we have noted with concern recent developments in a number of regions. In Asia Pacific, for example, the recent dramatic depreciation of the yen significantly reduces the cost of exports into the United States, Europe, and other global markets by Japanese manufacturers. Over a period of time, the emerging weakness of the yen can contribute to other countries pursuing weak currency policies by intervening in the exchange rate markets. This is particularly likely in other Asian countries, such as South Korea. As another example, government actions in South America to incentivize local production and balance trade are driving trade frictions between South American countries and also with Mexico, resulting in business environment instability and new trade barriers. We will continue to monitor and address developing issues around trade policy. Other Economic Factors. During 2016, mature market government bond yields and inflation were lower than expected. Although in recent months interest rates have risen, and deflation risks have receded somewhat, this is occurring against a backdrop of loose monetary policy, particularly in Europe and Japan. At the same time, government deficits and debt remain at high levels in many major markets. The eventual implications of higher government deficits and debt, with potentially higher long-term interest rates, may drive a higher cost of capital over our planning period. Higher interest rates and/or taxes to address the higher deficits also may impede real growth in gross domestic product and, therefore, vehicle sales over our planning period.
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

PART I

Item 1. Business
General Motors Company (sometimes referred to as we, our, us, ourselves, the Company, General Motors, or GM) was incorporated as a Delaware corporation in 2009. We design, build and sell cars, trucks, crossovers and automobile parts worldwide. We also provide automotive financing services through General Motors Financial Company, Inc. (GM Financial).

Automotive

Our automotive operations meet the demands of our customers through our four automotive segments: GM North America (GMNA), GM Europe (GME), GM International Operations (GMIO) and GM South America (GMSA).

GMNA primarily meets the demands of customers in North America with vehicles developed, manufactured and/or marketed under the Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet and GMC brands. The demands of customers outside North America are primarily met with vehicles developed, manufactured and/or marketed under the Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet, GMC, Holden, Opel and Vauxhall brands. We also have equity ownership stakes directly or indirectly in entities through various regional subsidiaries, primarily in Asia. These companies design, manufacture and market vehicles under the Baojun, Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet, Jiefang and Wuling brands.

In addition to the products we sell to our dealers for consumer retail sales, we also sell cars and trucks to fleet customers, including daily rental car companies, commercial fleet customers, leasing companies and governments. We sell vehicles to fleet customers directly or through our network of dealers. Our retail and fleet customers can obtain a wide range of aftersale vehicle services and products through our dealer network, such as maintenance, light repairs, collision repairs, vehicle accessories and extended service warranties.

Competitive Position

The global automotive industry is highly competitive. The principal factors that determine consumer vehicle preferences in the markets in which we operate include overall vehicle design, price, quality, available options, safety, reliability, fuel economy and functionality. Market leadership in individual countries in which we compete varies widely.

Vehicle Sales

We present both wholesale and retail vehicle sales data to assist in the analysis of our revenue and our market share. We do not currently export vehicles to Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Sudan or Syria. Accordingly these countries are excluded from industry sales data in the tables below and corresponding calculations of our market share.

Wholesale Vehicle Sales

Wholesale vehicle sales data, which represents sales directly to dealers and others, is the measure that correlates to our revenue from the sale of vehicles, which is the largest component of Automotive net sales and revenue. Wholesale vehicle sales exclude vehicles produced by joint ventures. We estimate our global breakeven point, excluding joint ventures selling automobiles in China (Automotive China JVs), to be approximately 4.5 million annual wholesale vehicle sales. In the year ended December 31, 2015, 48.3% of our wholesale vehicle sales volume was generated outside the U.S. The following table summarizes total wholesale vehicle sales of new vehicles by automotive segment (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years ended December 31,
 
2015
 
2014
 
2013
GMNA
3,558

 
60.5
%
 
3,320

 
55.0
%
 
3,276

 
51.1
%
GME
1,127

 
19.2
%
 
1,172

 
19.4
%
 
1,163

 
18.1
%
GMIO
588

 
10.0
%
 
655

 
10.9
%
 
921

 
14.4
%
GMSA
603

 
10.3
%
 
886

 
14.7
%
 
1,053

 
16.4
%
Worldwide
5,876

 
100.0
%
 
6,033

 
100.0
%
 
6,413

 
100.0
%

Retail Vehicle Sales

1


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


Retail vehicle sales data, which represents sales to the end customers based upon the good faith estimates of management, including fleets, does not correlate directly to the revenue we recognize during the period. However retail vehicle sales data is indicative of the underlying demand for our vehicles. Market share information is based primarily on retail vehicle sales volume. In countries where retail vehicle sales data is not readily available other data sources, such as wholesale or forecast volumes, are used to estimate sales to the end customers.

Retail vehicle sales data includes all sales by joint ventures on a total vehicle basis, not based on the percentage of ownership in the joint venture. Certain joint venture agreements in China allow for the contractual right to report vehicle sales of non-GM trademarked vehicles by those joint ventures. Retail vehicle sales data includes vehicles sold through the dealer registration channel (primarily in Europe). This sales channel consists primarily of dealer demonstrator, loaner and self-registered vehicles. These vehicles are not eligible to be sold as new vehicles after being registered by dealers. Certain fleet sales that are accounted for as operating leases are included in retail vehicle sales at the time of delivery to the daily rental car companies. The following table summarizes total industry retail sales, or estimated sales where retail sales volume is not available, of new vehicles and our related competitive position by geographic region (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2015
 
2014
 
2013
 
Industry
 
GM
 
Market Share
 
Industry
 
GM
 
Market Share
 
Industry
 
GM
 
Market Share
North America
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
United States
17,852

 
3,082

 
17.3
%
 
16,859

 
2,935

 
17.4
%
 
15,894

 
2,786

 
17.5
%
Other
3,666

 
530

 
14.5
%
 
3,345

 
478

 
14.3
%
 
3,196

 
448

 
14.0
%
Total North America
21,518

 
3,612

 
16.8
%
 
20,204

 
3,413

 
16.9
%
 
19,090

 
3,234

 
16.9
%
Europe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Germany
3,540

 
244

 
6.9
%
 
3,357

 
237

 
7.1
%
 
3,258

 
242

 
7.4
%
United Kingdom
3,063

 
312

 
10.2
%
 
2,845

 
305

 
10.7
%
 
2,597

 
301

 
11.6
%
Russia
1,622

 
68

 
4.2
%
 
2,540

 
189

 
7.5
%
 
2,834

 
258

 
9.1
%
Other
11,064

 
552

 
5.0
%
 
9,963

 
525

 
5.3
%
 
9,715

 
592

 
6.1
%
Total Europe
19,289

 
1,176

 
6.1
%
 
18,705

 
1,256

 
6.7
%
 
18,404

 
1,393

 
7.6
%
Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
China(a)
25,054

 
3,730

 
14.9
%
 
24,035

 
3,540

 
14.7
%
 
22,202

 
3,160

 
14.2
%
Other
18,943

 
795

 
4.2
%
 
19,137

 
838

 
4.4
%
 
19,035

 
890

 
4.7
%
Total Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa
43,997

 
4,525

 
10.3
%
 
43,172

 
4,378

 
10.1
%
 
41,237

 
4,050

 
9.8
%
South America
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Brazil
2,568

 
388

 
15.1
%
 
3,498

 
579

 
16.6
%
 
3,767

 
650

 
17.3
%
Other
1,613

 
257

 
15.9
%
 
1,817

 
299

 
16.5
%
 
2,171

 
387

 
17.8
%
Total South America
4,181

 
645

 
15.4
%
 
5,315

 
878

 
16.5
%
 
5,938

 
1,037

 
17.5
%
Total Worldwide
88,985

 
9,958

 
11.2
%
 
87,396

 
9,925

 
11.4
%
 
84,669

 
9,714

 
11.5
%
United States
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cars
7,566

 
931

 
12.3
%
 
7,688

 
1,085

 
14.1
%
 
7,556

 
1,067

 
14.1
%
Trucks
5,184

 
1,274

 
24.6
%
 
4,754

 
1,113

 
23.4
%
 
4,247

 
998

 
23.5
%
Crossovers
5,102

 
877

 
17.2
%
 
4,417

 
737

 
16.7
%
 
4,091

 
721

 
17.6
%
Total U.S.
17,852

 
3,082

 
17.3
%
 
16,859

 
2,935

 
17.4
%
 
15,894

 
2,786

 
17.5
%
China
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SGMS
 
 
1,711

 
 
 
 
 
1,710

 
 
 
 
 
1,516

 
 
SGMW and FAW-GM
 
 
2,019

 
 
 
 
 
1,830

 
 
 
 
 
1,644

 
 
Total China
25,054

 
3,730

 
14.9
%
 
24,035

 
3,540

 
14.7
%
 
22,202

 
3,160

 
14.2
%

2


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

__________
(a)
Our China sales include the Automotive China JVs SAIC General Motors Sales Co., Ltd. (SGMS), SAIC-GM-Wuling Automobile Co., Ltd. (SGMW) and FAW-GM Light Duty Commercial Vehicle Co., Ltd. (FAW-GM). End customer data is not readily available for the industry; therefore, wholesale volumes were used for Industry, GM and Market Share. Our retail sales in China were 3,613; 3,435 and 3,082 in the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013.

In the year ended December 31, 2015 we estimate we had the largest market share in North America and South America, the number two market share in the Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa region, which included the largest market share in China, and the number seven market share in Europe. In the year ended December 31, 2015 the Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa region was our largest region by retail vehicle sales volume and represented 45.4% of our global retail vehicle sales.

Our retail vehicle sales volumes in the year ended December 31, 2015 grew at a slightly slower pace than the overall industry, resulting in a 0.2 percentage point industry share decline. Our market share decreased due primarily to the change of our business model in Russia, our vehicle price increases in Brazil and our planned reduction of fleet sales in the U.S., (refer to the "Overview" section of Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) for detail), partially offset by our market share increase in China driven by strong performance of existing products and successful new launches including new sport utility vehicles (SUVs), Cadillac vehicles and multipurpose vehicles. Our retail vehicle sales volumes in the year ended December 31, 2014 grew at a slightly slower pace than the overall industry, resulting in a 0.1 percentage point industry share decline. Our market share decreased due primarily to the withdrawal of the Chevrolet brand from Europe and economic conditions and competitive environment in Brazil, partially offset by our market share increase in China driven by improved performance of existing products and successful launches of new vehicles.

Fleet Sales and Deliveries

The sales and market share data provided previously includes both retail and fleet vehicle sales. Certain fleet transactions, particularly daily rental, are generally less profitable than retail sales. A significant portion of the sales to daily rental car companies are recorded as operating leases under U.S. GAAP with no recognition of revenue at the date of initial delivery due to guaranteed repurchase obligations. The following table summarizes estimated fleet sales and those sales as a percentage of total retail vehicle sales (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2015
 
2014
 
2013
GMNA
795

 
814

 
758

GME
544

 
505

 
490

GMIO
345

 
414

 
415

GMSA
121

 
176

 
184

Total fleet sales
1,805

 
1,909

 
1,847

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fleet sales as a percentage of total retail vehicle sales
18.1
%
 
19.2
%
 
19.0
%

The following table summarizes U.S. fleet sales (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2015
 
2014
 
2013
Daily rental sales
400

 
449

 
439

Other fleet sales
278

 
255

 
217

Total fleet sales
678

 
704

 
656

Fleet sales as a percentage of total U.S. retail vehicle sales
 
 
 
 
 
Cars
29.3
%
 
29.5
%
 
26.4
%
Trucks
19.7
%
 
21.8
%
 
24.2
%
Crossovers
17.5
%
 
19.1
%
 
18.6
%
Total vehicles
22.0
%
 
24.0
%
 
23.6
%

Product Pricing


3


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Several methods are used to promote our products, including the use of dealer, retail and fleet incentives such as customer rebates and finance rate support. The level of incentives is dependent in large part upon the level of competition in the markets in which we operate and the level of demand for our products. In 2016 we plan to continue to price vehicles competitively, including offering incentives as required. We believe this strategy, coupled with sound inventory management, will continue to strengthen the reputation of our brands.

Cyclical Nature of Business

Retail sales are cyclical and production varies from month to month. Vehicle model changeovers occur throughout the year as a result of new market entries. The market for vehicles depends on general economic conditions, credit availability and consumer spending.

Relationship with Dealers

We market vehicles worldwide primarily through a network of independent authorized retail dealers. These outlets include distributors, dealers and authorized sales, service and parts outlets.

The following table summarizes the number of authorized dealerships:
 
December 31, 2015
 
December 31, 2014
 
December 31, 2013
GMNA
4,886

 
4,908

 
4,946

GME
6,330

 
6,633

 
7,087

GMIO
7,755

 
7,699

 
7,472

GMSA
1,281

 
1,272

 
1,201

Total worldwide
20,252

 
20,512

 
20,706


We and our joint ventures enter into a contract with each authorized dealer agreeing to sell to the dealer one or more specified product lines at wholesale prices and granting the dealer the right to sell those vehicles to retail customers from an approved location. Our dealers often offer more than one GM brand at a single dealership in a number of our markets in order to enhance dealer profitability. Authorized dealers offer parts, accessories, service and repairs for GM vehicles in the product lines that they sell using GM parts and accessories. Our dealers are authorized to service GM vehicles under our limited warranty program and those repairs are to be made only with GM parts. Our dealers generally provide their customers access to credit or lease financing, vehicle insurance and extended service contracts provided by GM Financial and other financial institutions.

The quality of GM dealerships and our relationship with our dealers and distributors are critical to our success as dealers maintain the primary sales and service interface with the end consumer of our products. In addition to the terms of our contracts with our dealers we are regulated by various country and state franchise laws that may supersede those contractual terms and impose specific regulatory requirements and standards for initiating dealer network changes, pursuing terminations for cause and other contractual matters.

Research, Product and Business Development and Intellectual Property

Costs for research, manufacturing engineering, product engineering and design and development activities relate primarily to developing new products or services or improving existing products or services including activities related to vehicle emissions control, improved fuel economy, the safety of drivers and passengers, urban mobility and autonomous vehicles. In the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 research and development expenses were $7.5 billion, $7.4 billion and $7.2 billion.

Product Development

The Product Development organization is responsible for designing and integrating vehicle and powertrain components to maximize part sharing across multiple vehicle segments. Global teams in Design, Program Management, Component & Subsystem Engineering, Product Integrity, Powertrain and Purchasing & Supply Chain collaborate to meet customer requirements and maximize global economies of scale.

Our global vehicle architecture development has been consolidated and headquartered at our Global Technical Center in Warren, Michigan, to further the standardization of our overall vehicle development process. Cross-segment part sharing is an essential

4


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

enabler to our Vehicle Set Strategy, designed to reduce our overall number of global vehicle architectures to four major vehicle sets. As we implement the four vehicle sets, we will continue to leverage our current architecture portfolio to accommodate our customers around the world while achieving our financial goals.

Hybrid, Plug-In, Extended Range and Battery Electric Vehicles

We are investing significantly in multiple technologies offering increasing levels of vehicle electrification including eAssist, plug-in hybrid, full hybrid, extended range and battery electric vehicles. We currently offer five models in the U.S. featuring some form of electrification and continue to develop plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) technology and extended range electric vehicles such as the Chevrolet Volt and Cadillac ELR. In 2015 we introduced the second-generation Chevrolet Volt. We also debuted the Chevrolet Bolt EV concept at the 2015 North American International Auto Show in Detroit, Michigan and the Cadillac CT6 PHEV at the 2015 Shanghai Auto Show. The Bolt EV will be an all-electric vehicle when it goes into production at our Orion Assembly plant in late 2016, providing more than 200 miles of range on a full charge.

OnStar, LLC

OnStar, LLC (OnStar) is a wholly-owned subsidiary of GM serving more than 6.6 million subscribers in the U.S., Canada, Mexico, China (through a joint venture) and selected markets in Europe (launched in August 2015). OnStar is a provider of connected safety, security and mobility solutions and advanced information technology and is available on the majority of our 2016 model year vehicles. OnStar's key services include automatic crash response, stolen vehicle assistance, remote door unlock, turn-by-turn navigation, vehicle diagnostics, hands-free calling and 4G LTE wireless connectivity.

OnStar has developed a system based on the findings of a Center for Disease Control and Prevention expert panel which allows OnStar advisors to alert first responders when a vehicle crash is likely to have caused serious injury to the occupants. OnStar also offers a mobile application to provide subscribers with up-to-date vehicle information such as oil level, tire pressure and fuel level as well as remote start, remote door lock and unlock and navigation services from a mobile phone.

Car- and Ride-Sharing

In January 2016 we announced the next step in our strategy to redefine personal mobility with a new car-sharing service called Maven, which combines our multiple car-sharing programs under a single brand and will expand its offerings to multiple cities and communities across the U.S. Maven gives customers access to highly personalized, on-demand mobility services. In January 2016 we purchased a 9% equity ownership interest in Lyft, Inc. (Lyft), a privately held company, for $0.5 billion, which we will leverage to expand our ride-sharing offerings. We also plan to develop with Lyft an integrated network of on-demand autonomous vehicles in the U.S.

Autonomous Technology

We see automation and autonomous technology leading to significant advances in convenience, mobility and safety, since more than 90% of crashes are caused by driver error. We have millions of miles of real-world experience with embedded connectivity through OnStar and advanced safety features that are the building blocks to more advanced automation features and eventually to fully autonomous vehicles. An example of an advanced automation is Super Cruise, a hands-free driving customer convenience feature that we expect to debut in 2017 on the Cadillac CT6 sedan. We are also working on autonomous systems and in 2016 plan to demonstrate the capabilities of a fleet of Chevrolet Volts on our 20,000-employee Global Technical Center campus. These vehicles will be ordered by a mobile phone application to go to the requested location and drive employees to their destination.

Alternative Fuel Vehicles

We believe alternative fuels offer significant potential to reduce petroleum consumption in the transportation sector. By leveraging experience and capability developed around these technologies in our global operations we continue to develop FlexFuel vehicles that can run on gasoline-ethanol blend fuels as well as vehicles that run on compressed natural gas (CNG) and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG).

We currently offer 12 FlexFuel vehicles in the U.S. for the 2016 model year to retail customers plus an additional seven models to fleet and commercial customers capable of operating on gasoline, E85 ethanol or any combination of the two. We continue to study the future role FlexFuel vehicles may play in the U.S. in light of recent regulatory developments and the rate of development

5


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

of the refueling infrastructure. In Brazil a substantial majority of vehicles sold were FlexFuel vehicles capable of running on 100% ethanol blends. We also market FlexFuel vehicles in other global markets where biofuels have emerged in the marketplace.

We produce CNG bi-fuel capable vehicles in Europe such as the Opel Zafira and in the U.S. with the Chevrolet Express and GMC Savana full-size vans (fleet and commercial customers) and the Chevrolet Silverado and GMC Sierra 2500 HD pick-up trucks (commercial and retail customers) that are capable of switching between gasoline or diesel and CNG. In addition we offer the CNG bi-fuel Chevrolet Impala full-size sedan to both fleet and retail markets in the U.S. We offer LPG capable vehicles globally in select markets reflecting the infrastructure, regulatory focus and natural resource availability of the markets in which they are sold.

We support the development of biodiesel blend fuels, which are alternative diesel fuels produced from renewable sources, and we provide biodiesel capabilities in other markets reflecting the availability of biodiesel blend fuels.

Hydrogen Fuel Cell Technology

As part of our long-term strategy to reduce petroleum consumption and greenhouse gas emissions we are committed to continuing development of our hydrogen fuel cell technology. Our Chevrolet Equinox fuel cell electric vehicle demonstration programs, such as Project Driveway, have accumulated more than 3 million miles of real-world driving by consumers, celebrities, business partners and government agencies. These programs are helping us identify consumer and infrastructure needs to understand the business case for potential production of vehicles with this technology.

GM and Honda Motor Company entered into a long-term agreement to co-develop a next-generation fuel cell system and hydrogen storage technologies, aiming for the 2020 timeframe. The collaboration expects to succeed by sharing expertise, economies of scale and common sourcing strategies and builds upon GM's and Honda Motor Company's strengths as leaders in hydrogen fuel cell technology.

Fuel Efficiency

We are fully committed to improving fuel efficiency and meeting regulatory standards through a combination of strategies including: (1) extensive technology improvements to conventional powertrains; (2) increased use of smaller displacement engines and improved and advanced automatic transmissions; and (3) vehicle improvements including increased use of lighter, front-wheel drive architectures.

Intellectual Property

We generate and hold a significant number of patents in a number of countries in connection with the operation of our business. While none of these patents are individually material to our business as a whole, these patents are very important to our operations and continued technological development. We hold a number of trademarks and service marks that are very important to our identity and recognition in the marketplace.

Raw Materials, Services and Supplies

We purchase a wide variety of raw materials, parts, supplies, energy, freight, transportation and other services from numerous suppliers for use in the manufacture of our products. The raw materials primarily include steel, aluminum, resins, copper, lead and platinum group metals. We have not experienced any significant shortages of raw materials and normally do not carry substantial inventories of such raw materials in excess of levels reasonably required to meet our production requirements.

In some instances, we purchase systems, components, parts and supplies from a single source and may be at an increased risk for supply disruptions. The inability or unwillingness of these sources to supply us with parts and supplies could have a material adverse effect on our production capacity. Combined purchases from our two largest suppliers have ranged from approximately 10% to 11% of our total purchases in the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013.

Environmental and Regulatory Matters

Automotive Emissions Control


6


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

We are subject to laws and regulations that require us to control automotive emissions, including vehicle exhaust emission standards, vehicle evaporative emission standards and onboard diagnostic (OBD) system requirements. Advanced OBD systems are used to identify and diagnose problems with emission control systems. Problems detected by the OBD system and in-use compliance monitoring may increase warranty costs and the likelihood of recall. Emission and OBD requirements become more stringent each year as vehicles must meet lower emission standards and new diagnostics are required throughout the world without harmonization of global regulations. Zero emission vehicle (ZEV) requirements have been adopted by some U.S. states and there is the possibility that additional jurisdictions could adopt ZEV requirements in the future. While we believe all our products are designed and manufactured in material compliance with vehicle emissions requirements, regulatory authorities may conduct ongoing evaluations of the emissions compliance of products from all manufacturers. This includes vehicle emissions testing, including CO2 and nitrogen oxide emissions testing in Europe, and review of emission control strategies.

U.S. and Canada

The U.S. federal government imposes stringent emission control requirements on vehicles sold in the U.S. and additional requirements are imposed by various state governments. Canada抯 federal government vehicle emission requirements are generally aligned with the U.S. federal requirements. Each model year we must obtain certification for each test group that our vehicles will meet emission requirements from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) before we can sell vehicles in the U.S. and Canada and from the California Air Resources Board (CARB) before we can sell vehicles in California and other states that have adopted the California emissions requirements.

CARB's latest emission requirements include more stringent exhaust emission and evaporative emission standards including an increase in ZEVs offered by the same automaker such as electric and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles. CARB has adopted 2018 model year and later requirements for increasing volumes of ZEVs to achieve greenhouse gas as well as criteria pollutant emission reductions to help achieve the state's long-term greenhouse gas reduction goals. The EPA has adopted similar exhaust emission and evaporative emission standards which phase in with the 2017 model year, but do not include ZEV requirements. These new requirements will also increase the time and mileage periods over which manufacturers are responsible for a vehicle's emission performance.

The Clean Air Act permits states that have areas with air quality compliance issues to adopt the California car and light-duty truck emission standards in lieu of the federal requirements. Thirteen states currently have these standards in effect and 10 of these 13 states have adopted the ZEV requirements. The Province of Quebec has also announced its intention to adopt a ZEV requirement.

European Union

Emissions are regulated by the European Commission (EC) and by governmental authorities in each European Union Member State (EU Member States). The EC imposes emission control requirements on vehicles sold in all 28 EU Member States. We must demonstrate that vehicles will meet emission requirements from an approval authority in one EU Member State before we can sell vehicles in any EU Member States. The regulatory requirements include random testing of newly assembled vehicles and a manufacturer in-use surveillance program. The European Union requirements are equivalent in terms of stringency and implementation to the framework of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.

The existing level of exhaust emission standards for cars and light-duty trucks, Euro 6, was effective in 2014 for new vehicle approvals and 2015 for new vehicle registrations. Future European Union emission standards focus particularly on further reducing emissions from diesel vehicles by introducing new testing criteria based on 搑eal world driving?emissions (RDE). RDE tests will become effective in 2017. The new requirements will require additional technologies and further increase the cost of diesel engines, which currently cost more than gasoline engines. To comply with RDE tests we expect that we will need to implement technologies identical to those already in production to meet U.S. emission standards. These technologies will put additional cost pressures on the already challenging European Union market for small and mid-size diesel vehicles. Gasoline engines are also affected by the new requirements. The measures for gasoline vehicles that require technology to reduce exhaust pollutant emissions will have adverse effects on vehicle fuel economy which drives additional technology cost to maintain fuel economy.

In addition, increased scrutiny of compliance with emissions standards following the well-publicized emissions scandal involving an unrelated automotive manufacturer may result in changes to these standards, including the implementation of RDE tests, as well as stricter interpretations of these standards and more rigorous enforcement. This may lead to increased costs, penalties, negative publicity or reputation impact for us. Refer to Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of these risks.


7


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

In the long-term, we expect that the EC will continue devising regulatory requirements on the emission test cycle, real driving emission, low temperature testing, fuel evaporation and OBD.

China

China has implemented European type China 4 standards nationally with European OBD requirements for all newly registered vehicles. Cities such as Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou each currently require China 5 standards for newly registered vehicles. In total 11 eastern municipalities and provinces will require China 5 standards prior to nationwide implementation in 2017. The China 5 standards include more stringent emission requirements and increase the time and mileage periods over which manufacturers are responsible for a vehicle's emission performance. China is considering a unique China 6 emission standard with the potential to combine elements of European and U.S. standards. Local implementation is expected as early as 2019.

Automotive Fuel Economy

U.S. and Canada

Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) reporting is required for three separate fleets: domestically produced cars, imported cars and light-duty trucks. Both car and light-duty truck standards were established using targets for various vehicle sizes and vehicle model sales volumes. In 2016 our domestic car standard is estimated to be 36.2 mpg, our import car standard is estimated to be 40.0 mpg, and our light-duty truck standard is estimated to be 27.1 mpg. Our current product plan is expected to be compliant with the federal CAFE program through the 2016 model year. In addition to federal CAFE the EPA requires compliance with greenhouse gas requirements that are similar to the CAFE program. Our current product plan is expected to be compliant with the federal greenhouse gas program through the 2016 model year. CARB has agreed that compliance with the federal program is deemed to be compliant with the California program for the 2012 through 2016 model years. Although Canada has no parallel CAFE-style fuel economy regulations there are Canadian greenhouse gas regulations that are aligned with the U.S. EPA regulations and the Canadian fleets are expected to be compliant with the Canadian regulations through the 2016 model year.

Europe

The EU has implemented legislation regulating fleet average CO2 emissions in Europe and has adopted an even more stringent fleet average CO2 target for 2020. Requirements must be met through the introduction of CO2 reducing technologies on conventional gasoline and diesel engines or through ultra-low CO2 vehicles. We are developing a compliance plan by adopting operational CO2 targets for each market entry in Europe. The EC will also devise regulatory requirements on the CO2 emission test cycle as of 2017.

China

China has both an individual vehicle pass-fail type approval requirement based on Phase 2 standards and a fleet fuel consumption requirement based on Phase 3 standards based on vehicle curb weight for the 2012 through 2015 calendar years. Implementation began in 2012 with full compliance to 6.9L/100km required by 2015. China has continued subsidies for fuel efficient vehicles, plug-in hybrid, battery electric and fuel cell vehicles. China is now working on a more aggressive Phase 4 fleet fuel consumption standard that is expected to apply beginning in 2016 with full compliance to 5.0L/100km required by 2020.

Industrial Environmental Control

Our operations are subject to a wide range of environmental protection laws including those regulating air emissions, water discharge, waste management and environmental cleanup. Certain environmental statutes require that responsible parties fund remediation actions regardless of fault, legality of original disposal or ownership of a disposal site. Under certain circumstances these laws impose joint and several liability as well as liability for related damages to natural resources. Refer to Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information on environmental matters including site remediation.

To mitigate the effects our worldwide operations have on the environment and reduce greenhouse gas emissions associated with waste disposal, we are committed to converting as many of our worldwide operations as possible to landfill-free operations. At December 31, 2015, 90 (or approximately 50%) of our manufacturing operations were landfill-free. Additionally we have 41 non-manufacturing operations that are landfill-free. At our landfill-free manufacturing operations approximately 89% of waste materials are reused or recycled and 9% are converted to energy at waste-to-energy facilities. Including construction, demolition and remediation wastes, we estimate that we reused, recycled or composted over 2 million metric tons of waste materials at our global

8


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

manufacturing operations, converted over 140,000 metric tons of waste materials to energy at waste-to-energy facilities and avoided approximately 9 million metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions in the year ended December 31, 2015.

In addition to minimizing our impact on the environment our landfill-free program and total waste reduction commitments generate revenue from the sale of production by-products, reduce our use of material, reduce our carbon footprint and help to reduce the risks and financial liabilities associated with waste disposal.

We continue to search for ways to increase our use of renewable energy and improve our energy efficiency. At December 31, 2015 we had implemented projects globally that had increased our total renewable energy capacity to over 105 megawatts. In 2015 we also met the EPA Energy Star Challenge for Industry (EPA Challenge) at seven of our sites globally by reducing energy intensity an average of 22% at these sites. To meet the EPA Challenge industrial sites must reduce energy intensity by 10% in five years or fewer. Three of the sites achieved the goal for the first time, bringing the total number of GM-owned sites to have met the EPA Challenge to 73, with many sites achieving the goal multiple times. These efforts minimize our utility expenses and are part of our approach to addressing climate change through setting a greenhouse gas emissions reduction target, collecting accurate data, following our business plan and publicly reporting progress against our target.

Chemical Regulations

We continually monitor the implementation of chemical regulations to maintain compliance and evaluate their effect on our business, suppliers and the automotive industry.

U.S. and Canada

Governmental agencies in both the U.S. and Canada continue to introduce new regulations and legislation related to the selection and use of chemicals or substances of concern by mandating broad prohibitions, green chemistry, life cycle analysis and product stewardship initiatives. These initiatives give broad regulatory authority to ban or restrict the use of certain chemical substances and potentially affect automobile manufacturers' responsibilities for vehicle components at the end of a vehicle's life, as well as chemical selection for product development and manufacturing. Chemical restrictions in Canada are progressing more rapidly than in the U.S. as a result of Environment Canada抯 Chemical Management Plan to assess existing substances and implement risk management controls on any chemical deemed toxic. These emerging regulations will potentially lead to increases in costs and supply chain complexity. We believe that we are materially in compliance with these requirements or expect to be materially in compliance by the required date.

The U.S. Congress is currently pursuing an update of the Toxic Substances Control Act to grant the EPA more authority to regulate and ban chemicals from use in the U.S. which, if passed, is expected to greatly increase the level of regulation of chemicals in vehicles.

Europe

In 2007 the EU implemented its regulatory requirements, the EU REACH regulation among others, to register, evaluate, authorize and restrict the use of chemical substances. This regulation requires chemical substances manufactured in or imported into the EU to be registered with the European Chemicals Agency before 2018. Under this regulation, 搒ubstances of very high concern?may either require authorization for further use or may be restricted in the future. This could potentially increase the cost of certain alternative substances that are used to manufacture vehicles and parts, or result in a supply chain disruption when a substance is no longer available to meet production timelines. Our research and development initiatives may be diverted to address future requirements. We believe that we are materially in compliance with these requirements or expect to be materially in compliance by the required date.

Safety

In the U.S. the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 prohibits the sale of any new vehicle or equipment in the U.S. that does not conform to applicable vehicle safety standards established by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). If we or NHTSA determine that either a vehicle or vehicle equipment does not comply with a safety standard or if a vehicle defect creates an unreasonable safety risk the manufacturer is required to notify owners and provide a remedy. We are required to report certain information relating to certain customer complaints, warranty claims, field reports and notices and claims involving property damage, injuries and fatalities in the U.S. and claims involving fatalities outside the U.S. We are also required to report certain information concerning safety recalls and other safety campaigns outside the U.S.

9


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


Outside the U.S. safety standards and recall regulations often have the same purpose as the U.S. standards but may differ in their requirements and test procedures, adding complexity to regulatory compliance. Refer to Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information on significant recall activities in 2014.

Automotive Financing - GM Financial

GM Financial is our global captive automotive finance company and our global provider of automobile finance solutions. GM Financial conducts its business in North America, Europe, South America and, as a result of the 2015 acquisition of Ally Financial, Inc.'s (Ally Financial) equity interest in SAIC-GMAC Automotive Finance Company Limited (SAIC-GMAC), in China.

GM Financial provides retail lending, both loan and lease, across the credit spectrum. Additionally GM Financial offers commercial products to dealer customers that include new and used vehicle inventory financing, inventory insurance, working capital, capital improvement loans, and storage center financing.

In North America GM Financial's retail automobile finance programs include prime and sub-prime lending and full credit spectrum leasing. The sub-prime lending program is primarily offered to consumers with FICO scores less than 620 who have limited access to automobile financing through banks and credit unions and is expected to sustain a higher level of credit losses than prime lending. The leasing product is offered through our franchised dealers and primarily targets prime consumers leasing new vehicles. GM Financial is expanding its leasing, near prime and prime lending programs through our franchised dealers and anticipates that leasing and prime lending will become an increasing percentage of originations and the retail portfolio balance over time.

Internationally GM Financial抯 retail automobile finance programs focus on prime quality financing through loan and lease products.

GM Financial seeks to fund its operations in each country through local sources of funding to minimize currency and country risk. GM Financial primarily finances its loan, lease and commercial origination volume through the use of secured and unsecured credit facilities, through securitization transactions where such markets are developed and through the issuance of unsecured debt. In the three months ended September 30, 2015 GM Financial began accepting deposits from retail banking customers in Germany.

Employees

At December 31, 2015 we employed 130,000 (61%) hourly employees and 85,000 (39%) salaried employees. At December 31, 2015 52,000 (54%) of our U.S. employees were represented by unions, a majority of which were represented by the International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace and Agriculture Implement Workers of America (UAW). The following table summarizes worldwide employment (in thousands):
 
December 31, 2015
 
December 31, 2014
 
December 31, 2013
GMNA
115

 
110

 
109

GME
36

 
37

 
37

GMIO
32

 
33

 
36

GMSA
24

 
29

 
31

GM Financial
8

 
7

 
6

Total Worldwide
215

 
216

 
219

 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. - Salaried
45

 
40

 
36

U.S. - Hourly
52

 
51

 
51


Executive Officers of the Registrant
As of February 3, 2016 the names and ages of our executive officers and their positions with GM are as follows:

10


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Name (Age)
 
Present GM Position (Effective Date)
 
Positions Held During the Past Five Years (Effective Date)
Mary T. Barra (54)
 
Chairman & Chief Executive Officer (2016)
 
Chief Executive Officer and Member of the Board of Directors (2014) Executive Vice President, Global Product Development, Purchasing & Supply Chain (2013)
Senior Vice President, Global Product Development (2011) Vice President, Global Human Resources (2009)
Daniel Ammann (43)
 
President (2014)
 
Executive Vice President & Chief Financial Officer (2013)
Senior Vice President & Chief Financial Officer (2011)
GM Vice President, Finance & Treasurer (2010)
Jaime Ardila (60)(a)
 
Executive Vice President & President, South America (2013)
 
Vice President & President, South America (2010)
Alan S. Batey (52)
 
Executive Vice President & President, North America (2014)
 
Senior Vice President, Global Chevrolet and Brand Chief and U.S. Sales and Marketing (2013)
GM Vice President, U.S. Sales and Service, and Interim GM Chief Marketing Officer (2012)
Vice President, U.S. Chevrolet Sales and Service (2010)
James B. DeLuca (54)
 
Executive Vice President, Global Manufacturing (2014)
 
Vice President, Manufacturing, GM International Operations (2013)
Vice President, Quality, GM International Operations (2009)
Carel Johannes de Nysschen (55)
 
Executive Vice President & President, Cadillac (2014)
 
Infiniti Motor Company, President (2012)
Audi of America, Inc., President (2004)
Barry L. Engle (52)
 
Executive Vice President & President, South America (2015)
 
Agility Fuel Systems, CEO (2011)
THINK Holdings, CEO (2010)
Stefan Jacoby (57)
 
Executive Vice President & President, GM International (2013)
 
Volvo Car Corporation - Global Chief Executive Officer and President (2010)
Craig B. Glidden (58)
 
Executive Vice President & General Counsel (2015)
 
LyondellBasell, Executive Vice President and Chief Legal Officer (2009)
Karl-Thomas Neumann (54)
 
Executive Vice President & President, Europe and Chairman of the Management Board of Opel Group GmbH (2013)
 
CEO, Opel Group GmbH & President, GM Europe (2013)
Volkswagen Group China - Chief Executive Officer and President (2010)
John J. Quattrone (63)
 
Senior Vice President, Global Human Resources (2014)
 
VP of Human Resources, Global Product Development & Global Purchasing & Supply Chain / Corporate Strategy, Business Development & Global Planning & Program organizations (2009)
Mark L. Reuss (52)
 
Executive Vice President, Global Product Development, Purchasing & Supply Chain (2014)
 
Executive Vice President & President, North America (2013)
GM Vice President & President, North America (2009) GM Vice President, Global Vehicle Engineering (2009)
Charles K. Stevens, III (56)
 
Executive Vice President & Chief Financial Officer (2014)
 
Chief Financial Officer, GM North America (2010)
Interim Chief Financial Officer, GM South America (2011)
Matthew Tsien (55)
 
Executive Vice President & President, GM China (2014)
 
GM Consolidated International Operations Vice President, Planning, Program Management, & Strategic Alliances China (2012)
Executive Vice President, SAIC GM Wuling (2009)
Thomas S. Timko (47)
 
Vice President, Controller & Chief Accounting Officer (2013)
 
Applied Materials Inc. - Corporate Vice President, Chief Accounting Officer, and Corporate Controller (2010)
__________
(a) Retiring effective early 2016.    

There are no family relationships between any of the officers named above and there is no arrangement or understanding between any of the officers named above and any other person pursuant to which he or she was selected as an officer. Each of the officers named above was elected by the Board of Directors or a committee of the Board of Directors to hold office until the next annual election of officers and until his or her successor is elected and qualified or until his or her earlier resignation or removal. The Board of Directors elects the officers immediately following each annual meeting of the stockholders and may appoint other officers between annual meetings.

Segment Reporting Data

Operating segment data and principal geographic area data for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 are summarized in Note 23 to our consolidated financial statements.

11


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


Website Access to Our Reports

Our internet website address is www.gm.com. In addition to the information about us and our subsidiaries contained in this 2015 Form 10-K information about us can be found on our website including information on our corporate governance principles and practices. Our website and information included in or linked to our website are not part of this 2015 Form 10-K.

Our annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act) are available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after they are electronically filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The public may read and copy the materials we file with the SEC at the SEC's Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. Additionally the SEC maintains an internet site that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information. The address of the SEC's website is www.sec.gov.

*  *  *  *  *  *  *

Item 1A. Risk Factors

We face a number of significant risks and uncertainties in connection with our operations. Our business, results of operations and financial condition could be materially adversely affected by the factors described below. While we describe each risk separately, some of these risks are interrelated and certain risks could trigger the applicability of other risks described below.

Our ability to maintain profitability over the long-term is dependent upon our ability to fund and introduce new and improved vehicle models that are able to attract a sufficient number of consumers.

We operate in a very competitive industry with market participants routinely introducing new and improved vehicle models designed to meet rapidly evolving consumer expectations. Producing new and improved vehicle models competitively and preserving our reputation for designing, building and selling high quality cars and trucks is critical to our long-term profitability. We will launch a substantial number of new vehicles in 2016. Successful launches of our new vehicles are critical to our short-term profitability. In addition, our growth strategies require us to make significant investment in our brands to appeal to new markets.

Our long-term profitability depends upon our successfully creating and funding technological innovations in design, engineering and manufacturing, which requires extensive capital investment and the ability to retain and recruit talent. In some cases the technologies that we plan to employ are not yet commercially practical and depend on significant future technological advances by us and by our suppliers. Although we will seek to obtain intellectual property protection for our innovations to protect our competitive position, it is possible we may not be able to protect some of these innovations. There can be no assurance that advances in technology will occur in a timely or feasible way, or that others will not acquire similar or superior technologies sooner than we do or that we will acquire technologies on an exclusive basis or at a significant price advantage.
It generally takes two years or more to design and develop a new vehicle, and a number of factors may lengthen that time period. Because of this product development cycle and the various elements that may contribute to consumers?acceptance of new vehicle designs, including competitors?product introductions, technological innovations, fuel prices, general economic conditions and changes in styling preferences, an initial product concept or design may not result in a vehicle that generates sales in sufficient quantities and at high enough prices to be profitable. Our high proportion of fixed costs, both due to our significant investment in property, plant and equipment as well as other requirements of our collective bargaining agreements, which limit our flexibility to adjust personnel costs to changes in demands for our products, may further exacerbate the risks associated with incorrectly assessing demand for our vehicles.
Our profitability is dependent upon the success of full-size pick-up trucks and SUVs.

While we offer a balanced and complete portfolio of small, mid-size and large cars, crossovers, SUVs and trucks, we generally recognize higher profit margins on our full-size pick-up trucks and SUVs. Our success is dependent upon consumer preferences and our ability to sell higher margin vehicles in sufficient volumes. Any increases in the price of oil or any sustained shortage of

12


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

oil, including as a result of global political instability, could cause a shift in consumer demand towards smaller, more fuel efficient vehicles, and weaken the demand for our higher margin full-size pick-up trucks and SUVs.

Our business is highly dependent upon the global automobile market sales volume, which can be volatile.

Our business and financial results are highly sensitive to sales volume, changes to which can have a disproportionately large effect on our profitability. A number of economic and market conditions drive changes in vehicle sales, including real estate values, levels of unemployment, availability of affordable financing, fluctuations in the cost of fuel, consumer confidence, political unrest and global economic conditions. We cannot predict future economic and market conditions with certainty.

Our business in China is subject to aggressive competition and is sensitive to economic and market conditions.

Maintaining a strong position in the Chinese market is a key component of our global growth strategy. The automotive market in China is highly competitive, with competition from many of the largest global manufacturers and numerous smaller domestic manufacturers. As the size of the Chinese market continues to increase we anticipate that additional competitors, both international and domestic, will seek to enter the Chinese market and that existing market participants will act aggressively to increase their market share. Increased competition may result in price reductions, reduced margins and our inability to gain or hold market share. In addition our business in China is sensitive to economic and market conditions that drive sales volume in China.

A significant amount of our operations are conducted by joint ventures that we cannot operate solely for our benefit.

Many of our operations, primarily in China, are carried out by joint ventures. In joint ventures we share ownership and management of a company with one or more parties who may not have the same goals, strategies, priorities or resources as we do and may compete with us outside the joint venture. Joint ventures are intended to be operated for the equal benefit of all co-owners, rather than for our exclusive benefit. Operating a business as a joint venture often requires additional organizational formalities as well as time-consuming procedures for sharing information and making decisions. In joint ventures we are required to foster our relationships with our co-owners as well as promote the overall success of the joint venture, and if a co-owner changes or relationships deteriorate, our success in the joint venture may be materially adversely affected. The benefits from a successful joint venture are shared among the co-owners; therefore, we do not receive all the benefits from our successful joint ventures. In addition, because we share ownership and management with one or more parties, we may have limited control over the actions of a joint venture, particularly when we own a minority interest. As a result, we may be unable to prevent misconduct or other violations of applicable laws by a joint venture. Moreover, a joint venture may not follow the same requirements regarding internal controls and internal control over financial reporting that we follow. To the extent another party makes decisions that negatively impact the joint venture or internal control issues arise within the joint venture, we may have to take responsive or other action or we may be subject to penalties, fines or other related actions for these activities that could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations.

Our businesses outside the U.S. expose us to additional risks.

The majority of our vehicles are sold outside the U.S. We are pursuing growth opportunities for our business in a variety of business environments outside the U.S. Operating in a large number of different regions and countries exposes us to political, economic and other risks as well as multiple foreign regulatory requirements that are subject to change, including:

?
Changes in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates;
?
Economic downturns in foreign countries or geographic regions where we have significant operations, such as China;
?
Economic tensions between governments and changes in international trade and investment policies, including imposing restrictions on the repatriation of dividends, especially between the U.S. and China, more detailed inspections, higher tariffs or new barriers to entry;
?
Changes in foreign regulations impacting our overall business model restricting our ability to buy and sell our products in those countries, especially China;
?
Differing local product preferences and product requirements, including fuel economy, vehicle emissions and safety;
?
Impact of compliance with U.S. and other foreign countries?export controls and economic sanctions;
?
Liabilities resulting from U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, including those related to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and certain other anti-corruption laws;

13


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

?
Differing labor regulations and union relationships;
?
Consequences from changes in tax laws; and
?
Difficulties in obtaining financing in foreign countries for local operations.

We are subject to extensive laws, governmental regulations and policies, including those regarding fuel economy and emissions control, the enforcement of which or changes to existing ones, could cause us to incur increased costs or to face regulatory enforcement action and may have a significant effect on how we do business.

We are significantly affected by governmental regulations that can increase costs related to the production of our vehicles and affect our product portfolio. Meeting or exceeding many of these regulations is costly and often technologically challenging, especially where standards may not be harmonized across jurisdictions, a notable challenge with respect to mandated emissions and fuel economy standards. We anticipate that the number and extent of these regulations, and the related costs and changes to our product lineup, may increase significantly in the future. These government regulatory requirements could significantly affect our plans for global product development and given the uncertainty surrounding enforcement and regulatory definitions, may result in substantial costs, including civil or criminal penalties. In addition, an evolving but un-harmonized regulatory framework may limit or dictate the types of vehicles we sell and where we sell them, which can affect revenue. Refer to the "Environmental and Regulatory Matters" section of Item 1. Business for a discussion of these regulatory requirements. We also expect that manufacturers will be subject to increased scrutiny from regulators globally as a result of the well-publicized emissions scandal involving an unrelated automotive manufacturer in 2015. For example, government agencies in several countries have asked us for information; one of these, the German Ministry of Transportation, is requesting the participation of a number of automotive manufacturers, including our German subsidiary, in discussions on emissions control issues and has requested a written response from our subsidiary on the subject. This scrutiny, regulatory changes and increased enforcement may lead to increased testing and re-testing of our vehicles and analysis of their emissions control systems, which could lead to increased costs, penalties, negative publicity or reputational impact, and recall activity if regulators determine that emission levels and required regulatory compliance should be based on either a wider spectrum of driving conditions for future testing parameters or stricter or novel interpretations and consequent enforcement of existing requirements. No assurance can be given that the ultimate outcome of any potential investigations or increased testing resulting from this scrutiny would not materially and adversely affect us.

We are committed to meeting or exceeding fuel economy and emission control requirements. We expect that to comply with these requirements we will be required to sell a significant volume of hybrid electric vehicles, as well as implement new technologies for conventional internal combustion engines, all at increased cost levels. There is no assurance that we will be able to produce and sell vehicles that use such technologies on a profitable basis or that our customers will purchase such vehicles in the quantities necessary for us to comply with these regulatory programs. Alternative compliance measures may not be sufficiently available in the marketplace to meet volume driven compliance requirements.

Environmental liabilities for which we may be responsible are not reasonably estimable and could be substantial. Violations of safety or emissions standards could result in the recall of one or more of our products, negotiated remedial actions, possible fines, restricted product offerings or a combination of any of those items. Any of these actions could have substantial adverse effects on our operations including facility idling, reduced employment, increased costs and loss of revenue.

We could be materially adversely affected by a negative outcome in unusual or significant litigation, governmental investigations or other legal proceedings.

We are subject to legal proceedings involving various issues, including product liability lawsuits, stockholder litigation and governmental investigations, such as the legal proceedings related to the Ignition Switch Recall. Refer to the "GM North America" section of MD&A for additional information on the Ignition Switch Recall. Such legal proceedings could in the future result in the imposition of damages, including punitive damages, substantial fines, civil lawsuits and criminal penalties, interruptions of business, modification of business practices, equitable remedies and other sanctions against us or our personnel as well as significant legal and other costs. For a further discussion of these matters refer to Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements.

If, in the discretion of the U.S. Attorney抯 Office for the Southern District of New York (the Office), we do not comply with the terms of the Deferred Prosecution Agreement (the DPA), the Office may prosecute us for charges alleged by the Office including those relating to faulty ignition switches.
On September 17, 2015 we announced that we entered into the DPA with the Office regarding its investigation of the events leading up to certain recalls announced in February and March 2014 relating to faulty ignition switches. Under the DPA, we

14


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

consented to, among other things, the filing of a two-count information (the Information) in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York charging GM with a scheme to conceal material facts from a government regulator and wire fraud. We pled not guilty to the charges alleged in the Information. The DPA further provides that, in the event the Office determines during the period of deferral of prosecution (or any extensions thereof) that we have violated any provision of the DPA, including violating any U.S. federal law or our obligation to cooperate with and assist the independent monitor, the Office may, in its discretion, either prosecute us on the charges alleged in the Information or impose an extension of the period of deferral of prosecution of up to one additional year. Under such circumstance, the Office would be permitted to rely upon the admissions we made in the DPA and would benefit from our waiver of certain procedural and evidentiary defenses. Such a criminal prosecution could subject us to penalties that could have material adverse effect on our business, financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The costs and effect on our reputation of product safety recalls could materially adversely affect our business.

Government safety standards require manufacturers to remedy certain product safety defects through recall campaigns. Under these standards, we could be subject to civil or criminal penalties or may incur various costs, including significant costs for free repairs. At present, the costs we incur in connection with these recalls typically include the cost of the part being replaced and labor to remove and replace the defective part. We currently source a variety of systems, components, raw materials and parts, including but not limited to air bag inflators, from third parties. From time to time these items may have performance or quality issues that could harm our reputation and cause us to incur significant costs. For example, based on defect information reports filed with NHTSA by TK Holdings Inc. (Takata), we are currently conducting recalls for certain Takata air bag inflators used in some of our prior model year vehicles. We are continuing to assess the situation. Further recalls, if any, that may be required to remediate Takata air bag inflators in our vehicles could have a material impact on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows. In addition product recalls can harm our reputation and cause us to lose customers, particularly if those recalls cause consumers to question the safety or reliability of our products. Conversely not issuing a recall or not issuing a recall on a timely basis can harm our reputation, potentially expose us to significant monetary penalties, and cause us to lose customers for the same reasons as expressed above.

Any disruption in our suppliers' operations could disrupt our production schedule.

Our automotive operations are dependent upon the continued ability of our suppliers to deliver the systems, components, raw materials and parts that we need to manufacture our products. Our use of 搄ust-in-time?manufacturing processes allows us to maintain minimal inventory quantities of systems, components, raw materials and parts. As a result our ability to maintain production is dependent upon our suppliers delivering sufficient quantities of systems, components, raw materials and parts on time to meet our production schedules. In some instances we purchase systems, components, raw materials and parts from a single source and may be at an increased risk for supply disruptions. Financial difficulties or solvency problems with our suppliers, which may be exacerbated by the cost of remediating quality issues with these items, could lead to uncertainty in our supply chain or cause supply disruptions for us which could, in turn, disrupt our operations, including production of certain of our higher margin vehicles. Where we experience supply disruptions, we may not be able to develop alternate sourcing quickly. Any disruption of our production schedule caused by an unexpected shortage of systems, components, raw materials or parts even for a relatively short period of time could cause us to alter production schedules or suspend production entirely.

We are dependent on our manufacturing facilities around the world.
We assemble vehicles at various facilities around the world. These facilities are typically designed to produce particular models for particular geographic markets. No single facility is designed to manufacture our full range of vehicles. In some cases certain facilities produce products that disproportionately contribute a greater degree of profit to the Company than others. Should these or other facilities become unavailable either temporarily or permanently for any number of reasons, including labor disruptions, the inability to manufacture vehicles there may result in harm to our reputation, increased costs, lower revenues and the loss of customers. We may not be able to easily shift production of vehicles at an inoperable facility to other facilities or to make up for lost production. Any new facility needed to replace an inoperable manufacturing facility would need to comply with the necessary regulatory requirements, need to satisfy our specialized manufacturing requirements and require specialized equipment. Even though we carry business interruption insurance policies, we may suffer losses as a result of business interruptions that exceed the coverage available or any losses which may be excluded under our insurance policies.
If we do not deliver new products, services and customer experiences in response to new participants in the automotive industry, our business could suffer.

15


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

We believe that the automotive industry will experience more change in the next five years than it has in the previous 50 years. In addition to our traditional competitors, we must also be responsive to the entrance of non-traditional participants in the automotive industry. These non-traditional participants may seek to disrupt the historic business model of the industry through the introduction of new technologies, new products or services, new business models or new methods of travel. It is strategically significant that we lead the technological disruption occurring in our industry. As our business evolves, the pressure to innovate will encompass a wider range of products and services, including products and services that may be outside of our historically core business. If we do not accurately predict, prepare for and respond to new kinds of technological innovations, market developments and changing customer needs, our sales, profitability and long-term competitiveness may be harmed.
We operate in a highly competitive industry that has excess manufacturing capacity and attempts by our competitors to sell more vehicles could have a significant negative effect on our vehicle pricing, market share and operating results.

The global automotive industry is highly competitive and overall manufacturing capacity in the industry exceeds demand. Many manufacturers have relatively high fixed labor costs as well as significant limitations on their ability to close facilities and reduce fixed costs. Our competitors may respond to these relatively high fixed costs by providing subsidized financing or leasing programs, offering marketing incentives or reducing vehicle prices. Our competitors may also seek to benefit from economies of scale by consolidating or entering into other strategic agreements such as alliances intended to enhance their competitiveness.

Manufacturers in lower cost countries, such as China and India, have become competitors in key emerging markets and announced their intention of exporting their products to established markets as a low cost alternative to established entry-level automobiles. These actions have had, and are expected to continue to have, a significant negative effect on our vehicle pricing, market share and operating results, and present a significant risk to our ability to enhance our revenue per vehicle.
We may continue to restructure our operations in various countries, but we may not succeed in doing so.

We face difficult market and operating conditions in certain parts of the world that may require us to restructure, impair or rationalize these operations. In many countries across our regions we have experienced challenges in our operations and continue to strategically assess the manner in which we operate in certain countries. As we continue to assess our performance throughout the regions, additional restructuring, impairment and rationalization actions may be required and may be material.

Our future competitiveness and ability to achieve long-term profitability depends on our ability to control our costs, which requires us to successfully implement operating effectiveness initiatives throughout our automotive operations.

We are continuing to implement a number of operating effectiveness initiatives to improve productivity and reduce costs. Our future competitiveness depends upon our continued success in implementing these initiatives throughout our automotive operations. While some of the elements of cost reduction are within our control, others, such as interest rates or return on investments, which influence our expense for pensions, depend more on external factors, and there can be no assurance that such external factors will not materially adversely affect our ability to reduce our costs. Reducing costs may prove difficult due to our focus on increasing advertising and our belief that engineering expenses necessary to improve the performance, safety and customer satisfaction of our vehicles are likely to increase.

Security breaches and other disruptions to our vehicles, information technology networks and systems could interfere with the safety of our customers or our operations and could compromise the confidentiality of private customer data or our proprietary information.

We rely upon information technology networks and systems, including in-vehicle systems and mobile devices, some of which are managed by third-parties, to process, transmit and store electronic information, and to manage or support a variety of vehicle or business processes and activities. Additionally we collect and store sensitive data, including intellectual property, proprietary business information, propriety business information of our dealers and suppliers, as well as personally identifiable information of our customers and employees, in data centers and on information technology networks. The secure operation of these information technology networks and in-vehicle systems, and the processing and maintenance of this information, is critical to our business operations and strategy. Despite security measures and business continuity plans, our information technology networks and systems and in-vehicle systems may be vulnerable to damage, disruptions or shutdowns due to attacks by hackers or breaches due to errors or malfeasance by employees, contractors and others who have access to our networks and systems or computer viruses. The occurrence of any of these events could compromise our networks and the information stored there could be accessed, publicly disclosed, lost or stolen. These occurrences could also impact vehicle safety. We have been the target of these types of attacks in the past with no known material impacts and future attacks are likely to occur. If successful, these types of attacks on our network

16


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

or systems, including in-vehicle systems and mobile devices, or service failures could have a material adverse effect on our business and results of operations, due to, among other things, the loss of proprietary data, interruptions or delays in our business operations and damage to our reputation. In addition any such access, disclosure or other loss of information could result in legal claims or proceedings, liability or regulatory penalties under laws protecting the privacy of personal information, disrupt operations and reduce the competitive advantage we hope to derive from our investment in advanced technologies. Our insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover all the costs related to significant security attacks or disruptions resulting from such attacks.

We rely on GM Financial to provide financial services to our dealers and customers in a majority of the markets in which we sell vehicles. GM Financial faces a number of business, economic and financial risks that could impair its access to capital and negatively affect its business and operations and its ability to provide leasing and financing to retail consumers and commercial lending to our dealers to support additional sales of our vehicles.

We rely on GM Financial in North America, Europe, South America and China to support leasing and sales of our vehicles to consumers requiring vehicle financing and also to provide commercial lending to our dealers. Any reduction of GM Financial's ability to provide such financial services would negatively affect our efforts to support additional sales of our vehicles and expand our market penetration among consumers and dealers.

As an entity operating in the financial services sector, GM Financial is required to comply with a wide variety of laws and regulations that may be costly to adhere to and may affect our consolidated operating results. Compliance with these laws and regulations requires that GM Financial maintain forms, processes, procedures, controls and the infrastructure to support these requirements and these laws and regulations often create operational constraints both on GM Financial抯 ability to implement servicing procedures and on pricing. Laws in the financial services industry are designed primarily for the protection of consumers. The failure to comply with these laws could result in significant statutory civil and criminal penalties, monetary damages, attorneys?fees and costs, possible revocation of licenses and damage to reputation, brand and valued customer relationships.
The primary factors that could adversely affect GM Financial's business and operations and reduce its ability to provide financing services at competitive rates include:

?
The availability of borrowings under its credit facilities to fund its retail and dealer finance activities;
?
Its ability to access a variety of financing sources including the asset-backed securities market and other secured and unsecured debt markets;
?
The performance of loans and leases in its portfolio, which could be materially affected by delinquencies, defaults or prepayments;
?
Wholesale auction values of used vehicles;
?
Higher than expected vehicle return rates and the residual value performance on vehicles GM Financial leases to customers;
?
Fluctuations in interest rates and currencies; and
?
Changes to regulation, supervision and licensing across various jurisdictions, including new regulations or sanctions imposed in the U.S. by the Department of Justice, SEC and Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.

Our defined benefit pension plans are currently underfunded and our pension funding requirements could increase significantly due to a reduction in funded status as a result of a variety of factors, including weak performance of financial markets, declining interest rates, changes in laws or regulations, changes in assumptions or investments that do not achieve adequate returns.

Our employee benefit plans currently hold a significant amount of equity and fixed income securities. A detailed description of the investment funds and strategies is disclosed in Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements, which also describes significant concentrations of risk to the plan investments.

There are additional risks due to the complexity and magnitude of our investments. Examples include implementation of significant changes in investment policy, insufficient market liquidity in particular asset classes and the inability to quickly rebalance illiquid and long-term investments.

Our future funding requirements for our U.S. defined benefit pension plans depend upon the future performance of assets placed in trusts for these plans, the level of interest rates used to determine funding levels, the level of benefits provided for by the plans

17


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

and any changes in government laws and regulations. Future funding requirements generally increase if the discount rate decreases or if actual asset returns are lower than expected asset returns, assuming other factors are held constant. Our potential funding requirements are described in Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements.

Factors which affect future funding requirements for our U.S. defined benefit plans generally affect the required funding for non-U.S. plans. Certain plans outside the U.S. do not have assets and therefore the obligation is funded as benefits are paid. If local legal authorities increase the minimum funding requirements for our non-U.S. plans, we could be required to contribute more funds.


Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments

NoneITEM 1.

BUSINESS

Overview

We design, develop, manufacture and sell high-performance fully electric vehicles and energy storage products. We have established our own network of vehicle sales and service centers and Supercharger stations globally to accelerate the widespread adoption of electric vehicles. Our vehicles, electric vehicle engineering expertise, and business model differentiates us from incumbent automobile manufacturers.

We currently produce and sell two fully electric vehicles, the Model S sedan and the Model X sport utility vehicle (SUV). Both vehicles offer exceptional performance, functionality and attractive styling. We commenced deliveries of Model S in June 2012 and as of December 31, 2015 we have delivered over 107,000 new Model S vehicles worldwide. We have continued to improve Model S by introducing performance, all-wheel drive dual motor, and autopilot options, as well as free over-the-air software updates.

We commenced customer deliveries of Model X in the third quarter of 2015. This unique vehicle offers exceptional safety, seating for seven people, all-wheel drive, and our autopilot functionality. We are currently ramping production and deliveries of Model X in the United States and plan to offer it in Europe and Asia in 2016.

After the Model X, our goal is to introduce the Model 3, a lower priced sedan designed for the mass market. We intend to unveil Model 3 in the first quarter of 2016 and start production and deliveries in late 2017.

The commercial production of fully electric vehicles that meets consumers?range and performance expectations requires substantial design, engineering, and integration work on almost every system of our vehicles. Our design and vehicle engineering capabilities, combined with the technical advancements of our powertrain system, have enabled us to design and develop electric vehicles that we believe overcome the design, styling, and performance issues that have historically limited broad consumer adoption of electric vehicles. As a result, our customers enjoy several benefits, including:

 

?

Long Range and Recharging Flexibility. Our vehicles offer ranges that significantly exceed those of any other commercially available electric vehicle. In addition, our vehicles incorporate our proprietary on-board charging system, permitting recharging from almost any available electrical outlet. Our vehicles also offer fast charging capability from our Supercharger network. We believe the long-range and charging flexibility of our vehicles will help reduce consumer anxiety over range, alleviate the need for expensive, large-scale charging infrastructure, and differentiate our vehicles as compared to those of our competitors.

 

?

High-Performance Without Compromised Design or Functionality. Our vehicles deliver unparalleled driving experiences with instantaneous and sustained acceleration through an extended range of speed. In addition, our vehicles provide best in class storage in the trunk and hood while offering design and performance comparable to, or better than, other premium vehicles.

 

?

Energy Efficiency and Cost of Ownership. Our vehicles offer consumers an attractive cost of ownership when compared to similar internal combustion engine or hybrid electric vehicles. Using only an electric powertrain enables us to create more energy efficient vehicles that are mechanically simpler than currently available hybrid or internal combustion engine vehicles. The cost to fuel our vehicles is less compared to internal combustion vehicles. We also expect our electric vehicles will have lower relative maintenance costs than hybrid, plug-in hybrid, or internal combustion engine vehicles due to fewer moving parts and the absence of certain components, including oil, oil filters, spark plugs and engine valves. Additionally, government incentives that are currently available can reduce the cost of ownership even further.

We sell our vehicles through our own sales and service network which we are continuing to grow globally. We believe the benefits we receive from distribution ownership will enable us to improve the overall customer experience, the speed of product development and the capital efficiency of our business. We are also continuing to build our network of Superchargers in the United States, Europe and Asia to provide fast charging that enables convenient long distance travel.

In addition to developing our own vehicles, we sell energy storage products. We recently announced the next generation of our energy storage products, the 7 kWh and 10 kWh Powerwall for residential applications and the 100 kWh Powerpack for commercial and industrial applications. We began production and deliveries of these products, which we market under the Tesla Energy brand, in the third quarter of 2015.

We manufacture our products primarily at our facilities in Fremont, California, Lathrop, California, Tilburg, Netherlands and at our Gigafactory near Reno, Nevada. We are currently using battery packs manufactured at the Gigafactory for our energy storage products, and will do so for our vehicles in the future.

Our Vehicles and Products

We currently design, develop, manufacture and sell fully electric vehicles and energy storage products.

4

Model S

Model S is a fully electric, four-door, five-adult passenger sedan that offers compelling range and performance with zero tailpipe emissions. Model S offers a range on a single charge of up to 288 miles as determined using the United States EPA抯 combined two-cycle city/highway test. We offer performance and all-wheel drive dual motor system options. The performance version of our All-Wheel Drive Dual Motor Model S accelerates from 0 to 60 miles per hour in 2.8 seconds with the Ludicrous speed upgrade.

Model S offers a unique combination of functionality, convenience, safety and styling without compromising performance and energy efficiency. With the battery pack in the floor of the vehicle and the motor and gearbox in line with the rear axle, our single motor Model S provides best in class storage space. Model S is also available with premium luxury features, including a 17 inch touch screen driver interface, our advanced autopilot system with both active safety and convenience features, and over-the-air software updates. We believe the combination of performance, safety, styling, convenience and energy efficiency of Model S positions it as a compelling alternative to other vehicles in the luxury and performance segments.

Model X

Model X is a sport utility vehicle that offers exceptional functionality with high performance features such as our fully electric, all-wheel drive dual motor system and our autopilot system. Model X provides up to 257 miles of range on a single charge, and can accelerate from 0 to 60 as quickly as 3.2 seconds with the Ludicrous speed upgrade. Model X seats seven adults and incorporates a unique falcon wing door system for superior access to the second and third seating rows. Although the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration has not yet conducted crash testing on Model X, based on our internal testing, we expect Model X to receive the highest safety rating in every category. We began customer deliveries of Model X in the third quarter of 2015 in the United States. After its initial launch in the United States, Model X will be sold in all the markets where Model S is available including in Asia and Europe.

Model 3

We have also publicly announced our intent to develop a third generation electric vehicle, called Model 3, to be produced at the Tesla Factory. We intend to offer this vehicle at a lower price point and expect to produce it at higher volumes than our Model S or Model X. We plan to unveil Model 3 in March of 2016 and expect to start production and deliveries of this vehicle in late 2017.

Energy Storage Applications

Using the energy management technologies and manufacturing processes developed for our vehicle powertrain systems, we have developed energy storage products for use in homes, commercial sites and utilities. The applications for these battery systems include backup power, peak demand reduction, demand response and wholesale electric market services. We began selling our home systems in 2013 and our commercial and utility systems in 2014. We recently announced the next generation of our energy storage products under the Tesla Energy brand.

The Tesla Energy product portfolio will include energy storage products with a wide range of applications, from use in single homes to use in larger utility-scale projects. Tesla Powerwall is a rechargeable lithium-ion battery designed to store energy at a residential and small commercial level for load shifting, backup power and self-consumption of solar power generation. Powerwall is available in storage sizes of 10kWh, optimized for backup applications, or 7kWh, optimized for daily use applications. In addition, we offer a 100 kWh Powerpack for peak shaving, load shifting and demand response for commercial customers and for renewable firming and a variety of grid services for utilities. For utility scale systems, 100kWh battery blocks can be grouped together to offer installation of over 10MWh. We began production of our Tesla Energy products at the Gigafactory in the fourth quarter of 2015.

Technology

Our core competencies are powertrain engineering, vehicle engineering, innovative manufacturing and energy storage. Our core intellectual property resides not only within our electric powertrain, but also within our ability to design a vehicle that utilizes the unique advantages of an electric powertrain and the latest advancements in consumer technologies. Our powertrain consists of our battery pack, power electronics, motor, gearbox and control software. We designed our powertrain originally for our first vehicle, the Tesla Roadster, and commercialized improvements into vehicles manufactured by Daimler and Toyota, and ultimately into the Model S and Model X. Today, we offer several powertrain variants for the Model S and Model X that incorporate years of research and development performed since the original design. In addition, we have designed our vehicles to incorporate the latest advances in consumer technologies, such as mobile computing, sensing, displays, and connectivity. Further evolution of our technology continues for Model 3, which we plan to offer at significantly lower price. In addition, advancements originally commercialized in our vehicles are being leveraged for our storage applications.

5

Battery Pack

We design our battery packs to achieve high energy density at a low cost while also maintaining safety, reliability and long life. Our proprietary technology includes systems for high density energy storage, cooling, safety, charge balancing, structural durability, and electronics management. We have also pioneered advanced manufacturing techniques to manufacture large volumes of battery packs with high quality and low costs.

We have significant expertise in the safety and management systems needed to use lithium-ion cells in the automotive environment, and have actively worked with lithium-ion cell suppliers to further optimize cell designs to increase overall performance. These advancements have enabled us to improve cost and performance of our batteries over time. For example, in 2015 alone, we upgraded the battery of our lowest range Model S from 60 kWh to 70 kWh, and our highest range Model S to 90 kWh.

Our engineering and manufacturing efforts have been performed with a longer-term goal of building a foundation for further development. For instance, we have designed our battery pack to permit flexibility with respect to battery cell chemistry and form factor. In so doing, we can leverage the substantial investments and advancements being made globally by battery cell manufacturers to continue to improve cost. We maintain extensive testing and R&D capabilities at the individual cell level, the full battery-pack level, and other critical battery pack systems. As a result, we have built an expansive body of knowledge on lithium-ion cell vendors, chemistry types, and performance characteristics. We believe that the flexibility of our designs, combined with our research and real-world performance data, will enable us to continue to evaluate new battery cells as they become commercially viable, and thereby optimize battery pack system performance and cost for our current and future vehicles.

Power Electronics

The power electronics in our electric vehicle powertrain govern the flow of high voltage electrical current throughout the vehicle. The power electronics have two primary functions, powering our electric motor to generate torque while driving and delivering energy into the battery pack while charging.

The first function is accomplished through the drive inverter, which converts direct current (DC) from the battery pack into alternating current (AC) to drive our induction motors. The drive inverter also provides 搑egenerative braking?functionality, which captures energy from the wheels to charge the battery pack when needed. Tesla has developed a family of drive inverter designs that are customized to its proprietary motor designs to most efficiently meet the demands of each of our vehicles. The primary technological advantages to our designs include the ability to drive large amounts of current in a small physical package.

The second function, charging the battery pack, is accomplished by the charger, which converts alternating current (usually from a wall outlet or other electricity source) into direct current that can be accepted by the battery. Tesla vehicles can recharge on a wide variety of electricity sources due to the design of this charger, from a common household outlet to high power circuits meant for more industrial uses. In most markets, Tesla vehicles come with a Mobile Connector that allows for multiple different charging services to be used. In many markets, Tesla offers a Tesla Wall Connector that can be set up to provide higher power charging than the Mobile Connectors.

On the road, customers can also charge using our Supercharger network or at a variety of destinations that have deployed our charging equipment. In addition, Model S vehicles can charge at a variety of public charging stations around the world, either natively or through a suite of adapters. This flexibility in charging provides customers with additional mobility, while also allowing them to conveniently charge the vehicle overnight at home.

Dual Motor Powertrain

In October of 2014, we launched the initial version of our dual motor powertrain, which uses two electric motors to provide greater efficiency, performance, and range in an all-wheel drive configuration. Conventional all-wheel drive vehicles distribute power to the wheels from a single engine driving a complex mechanical transmission system. By contrast, Tesla抯 dual motor powertrain digitally and independently controls torque to the front and rear wheels. The almost instantaneous response of the motors, combined with low centers of gravity provides drivers with controlled performance and increased traction control.

Vehicle Control and Infotainment Software

The performance and safety systems of our vehicles and their battery packs require sophisticated control software. There are numerous processors in our vehicles to control these functions, and we write custom firmware for many of these processors. The flow of electricity between the battery pack and the motor must be tightly controlled in order to deliver the performance and behavior expected in the vehicle. For example, software algorithms enable the vehicle to mimic the 揷reep?feeling which drivers expect from an internal combustion engine vehicle without having to apply pressure on the accelerator. Similar algorithms control traction, vehicle stability and the sustained acceleration and regenerative braking of the vehicle. Software also is used extensively to monitor the charge state of each of the cells of the battery pack and to manage all of its safety systems. Drivers use the information and control systems in our vehicles to optimize performance, customize vehicle behavior, manage charging modes and times and control all infotainment functions. We develop almost all of this software, including most of the user interfaces, internally.

6

Autopilot Systems

We have developed an expertise in vehicle autopilot systems, including auto-steering, traffic aware cruise control, lane changing, automated parking, driver warning systems and automated braking functions. In October of 2014, we began equipping all Model S vehicles with hardware to allow for the incremental introduction of autopilot technology. Our autopilot systems relieve our drivers of the most tedious and potentially dangerous aspects of road travel. Although the driver is ultimately responsible for controlling the vehicle, our system provides safety and convenience functionality that allows our customers to rely on it much like the system that airplane pilots use when conditions permit. Our autopilot system leverages an advanced set of hardware including a forward radar, a forward-looking camera, 12 long-range ultrasonic sensors, and a high-precision digitally controlled electric assist braking system. This hardware suite, along with over-the-air firmware updates and field data feedback loops from the onboard camera, radar, ultrasonics, and GPS, enables the system to continually learn and improve its performance.

Vehicle Design and Engineering

In addition to the design, development and production of the powertrain, we have created significant in-house capabilities in the design and engineering of electric vehicles and electric vehicle components and systems. We design and engineer bodies, chassis, interiors, heating and cooling and low voltage electrical systems in house and to a lesser extent in conjunction with our suppliers. Our team has core competencies in computer aided design and crash test simulations which we expect to reduce the product development time of new models.

Additionally, our team has expertise in lightweight materials, a very important characteristic for electric vehicles given the impact of mass on range. Model S and Model X are built with a lightweight aluminum body and chassis which incorporates a variety of materials and production methods that help optimize the weight of the vehicle.

Vehicle Sales and Marketing

Company-Owned Stores and Galleries

We market and sell cars directly to consumers through an international network of company-owned stores and galleries. Our Tesla stores and galleries are highly visible, premium outlets in major metropolitan markets, some of which combine retail sales and service. We have also found that opening a service center in a new geographic area can increase demand. As a result, we have complemented our store strategy with sales facilities and personnel in service centers to more rapidly expand our retail footprint. We refer to these as 揝ervice Plus?locations. Including all of our stores, galleries, Service Plus and service facilities, we operated 208 locations around the world as of December 31, 2015.

We own our sales and service network because the traditional franchised distribution and service model is not viable for a business like ours. In our company-owned network, our customers deal directly with our own Tesla-employed sales and service staff, creating a differentiated buying experience from the buying experience consumers have with franchised automobile dealers and service centers. We believe we will also be able to better control costs of inventory, manage warranty service and pricing, maintain and strengthen the Tesla brand, and obtain rapid customer feedback.

Tesla Supercharger Network

We are building a network of up to 120 kW fast charging equipment, each called a Tesla Supercharger, throughout North America, Europe and Asia for fast charging of Tesla vehicles. Our Supercharger network is a strategic corporate initiative designed to remove a barrier to the broader adoption of electric vehicles caused by the perception of limited vehicle range and to provide fast charging to enable long-distance travel. The Tesla Supercharger is an industrial grade, high speed charger designed to replenish 170 miles of range in the battery pack in as little as 30 minutes. Supercharger stations typically have between four to ten Superchargers and are strategically placed primarily along well-travelled highways to allow Model S and Model X owners to enjoy long distance travel with convenient, minimal stops. As of December 31, 2015, we had 584 Supercharger stations open in North America, Europe, and Asia. We are planning to continue to expand the Supercharger network in the United States, Europe and Asia.

Destination Charging

We are working with a wide variety of hospitality locations, including hotels and popular destinations, to offer an additional charging option for our customers. These destination charging partners deploy our wall connectors and provide charging to Model S owners that patronize their businesses. As of December 31, 2015, over 1,800 locations around the world had more than 3,100 Tesla wall connectors installed.

Orders and Reservations

We typically carry a very limited inventory of our vehicles at our Tesla stores. The vast majority of our customers customize their vehicle by placing an order with us via the Internet. To begin production or make a reservation, we require an initial payment which is collected once the customer has selected the vehicle specifications and has entered into a purchase agreement. We require all remaining payment of the purchase price of the vehicle upon delivery of the vehicle to the customer.

7

Marketing

Our principal marketing goals are to:

 

?

generate demand for our vehicles and drive leads to our sales teams;

 

?

build long-term brand awareness and manage corporate reputation;

 

?

manage our existing customer base to create loyalty and customer referrals, including through our referral programs; and

 

?

enable customer input into the product development process.

Historically, we have been able to generate significant media coverage of our company and our vehicles, and we believe we will continue to do so. To date, media coverage and word of mouth have been the primary drivers of our sales leads and have helped us achieve sales without traditional advertising and at relatively low marketing costs.

Vehicle Service and Warranty

Service

We provide service for our electric vehicles at our company-owned service centers, at our Service Plus locations or, in certain areas for an additional charge, through Tesla Ranger mobile technicians who provide services that do not require a vehicle lift. We owned and operated 118 service locations as of December 31, 2015. We are continuing our plan to build a number of additional service centers in several markets worldwide.

Our vehicles are designed with the capability to wirelessly upload the data to us via an on-board system with cellular connectivity, allowing us to diagnose and remedy many problems before ever looking at the vehicle. When maintenance or service is required, a customer can schedule service by contacting one of our Tesla service centers. Our Tesla Rangers, or mobile service team, can also perform an array of services from the convenience of a customer抯 home or other remote location.

Our company-owned service centers enable our technicians to work closely with our engineers and research and development teams in Silicon Valley to identify problems, find solutions, and incorporate improvements faster than incumbent automobile manufacturers.

New Vehicle Limited Warranty, Maintenance and Extended Service Plans

We provide a four year or 50,000 mile New Vehicle Limited Warranty with every new vehicle, subject to separate limited warranties for the supplemental restraint system and battery. For the battery and drive unit on our current new vehicles, we offer an eight year, infinite mile warranty, although the battery抯 charging capacity is not covered.

In addition to the New Vehicle Limited Warranty, we offer a comprehensive maintenance program for every new vehicle, which includes plans covering prepaid maintenance for up to eight years or up to 100,000 miles and an Extended Service plan. The maintenance plans cover annual inspections and the replacement of wear and tear parts, excluding tires and the battery. The Extended Service plan covers the repair or replacement of vehicle parts for up to an additional four years or up to an additional 50,000 miles after the New Vehicle Limited Warranty.

Our New Vehicle Limited Warranty and Extended Service plans are subject to certain limitations, exclusions or separate warranties, including on certain wear items, such as tires, brake pads, paint and general appearance, and battery performance, and are intended to cover parts and labor to repair defects in material or workmanship in the body, chassis, suspension, interior, electronic systems, battery, powertrain and brake system. In addition, all prepaid maintenance and Extended Service plans must be purchased within a specified period of time after vehicle purchase or warranty expiration.

Financial Services

We offer loans and leases for our vehicles in North America, Europe and Asia primarily through various financial institutions. We also offer financing arrangements directly through our local subsidiaries in certain areas of the United States, Germany, Canada and the UK. We intend to broaden our financial services offerings during the next few years.

Certain of our financing programs provide customers with a resale value guarantee under which those customers have the option of selling their vehicle back to us at a preset future date, generally during the period of 36 to 39 months following delivery for a pre-determined resale value. This structure allows the customer to enjoy the benefits of vehicle ownership without concern for resale value. We introduced this program in North America in 2013 and expanded it to selected European and APAC markets in 2014 and 2015. In certain markets, we also offer residual value guarantees to financial institutions which may obligate us to repurchase the vehicles for a pre-determined price.

8

Manufacturing

We conduct vehicle manufacturing and assembly operations at our facilities in Fremont, California; Lathrop, California; and Tilburg, Netherlands. We are also building a cell and battery manufacturing facility, the Tesla Gigafactory, outside of Reno, Nevada.

The Tesla Factory in Fremont, CA and Manufacturing Facility in Lathrop, CA

We manufacture the Model S and Model X and certain components that are critical to our intellectual property and quality standards at the Tesla Factory. The Tesla Factory contains several manufacturing operations, including stamping, machining, casting, plastics, body assembly, paint operations, seat assembly, final vehicle assembly and end-of-line testing. In addition, we manufacture lithium-ion battery packs, electric motors, gearboxes and components for our vehicles at the Tesla Factory. Several major component systems of our vehicles are purchased from suppliers; however we have a high level of vertical integration in our manufacturing processes at the Tesla Factory. We machine various aluminum components at our facility in Lathrop, California and are nearing completion of a site expansion to include an aluminum castings operation.

We have completed significant investments to increase our production capacity and to begin production of the Model X at the Tesla Factory. This includes the completion and launch of the first phase of a new high volume paint shop, our second body assembly shop, two new stamping lines, a seat assembly facility, and an expansion of the battery pack and drive unit production lines.

We plan to produce Model S, Model X and Model 3 at the Tesla Factory. In some areas of the Tesla Factory, we have designed our investments with flexibility to accommodate multiple products. For example, our new high volume paint shop and new stamping lines can support all three vehicles. Our final vehicle assembly line is producing the Model S and the Model X while certain powertrain components are shared between the Model S and Model X. Over the course of 2016, we plan to make significant additional investments at the Tesla Factory in order to be able to start production and deliveries of Model 3, in late 2017. These include a new body assembly shop and Model 3 final vehicle assembly.

The Netherlands

Our European headquarters and manufacturing facilities are located in Amsterdam and Tilburg. The entities through which these facilities are operated hold the rights to manufacture and distribute all Tesla products to customers in all markets outside of the United States and provide corporate oversight functions for European sales, service, and administrative functions. Our operations in Tilburg include final assembly, testing and quality control for vehicles delivered within the European Union, a parts distribution warehouse for service centers throughout Europe, a center for remanufacturing work and a customer service center.

The Gigafactory outside of Reno, Nevada

We are developing the Gigafactory as a facility where we work together with our suppliers to integrate battery material, cell, module and battery pack production in one location. We plan to use the battery packs manufactured at the Gigafactory for our vehicles and for our Tesla Energy applications. We broke ground on the Gigafactory in June 2014 and began assembling our Tesla Energy products in the first portion of the facility in the fourth quarter of 2015.

We currently expect to produce cells at the Gigafactory beginning in 2016 for use initially in our Tesla Energy products and later for our vehicles. The Gigafactory is currently expected to attain full production capacity in 2020, which is anticipated to be sufficient for the production of approximately 500,000 vehicles annually as well as for the production of our energy storage products. By that time, we expect battery pack production capacity to reach 50 GWh. Of this, we expect to build 35 GWh of cell production capacity at the Gigafactory and purchase 15 GWh of cells from other manufacturers.

We believe that the Gigafactory will allow us to achieve a significant reduction in the cost of our battery packs once we are in volume production with Model 3. The total capital expenditures associated with the Gigafactory through 2020 are expected to be $4 to $5 billion, of which approximately $2 billion is expected to come from Tesla. Panasonic has agreed to partner with us on the Gigafactory with investments in production equipment that it will use to manufacture and supply us with battery cells. We have a supply agreement with Panasonic that, among other things, allows us to purchase a minimum of 1.8 billion lithium-ion battery cells at preferential prices that we intend to purchase from 2014 through 2017. We have agreed to prepare and provide the land, buildings and utilities, invest in production equipment for battery module and pack production and be responsible for the overall management of the Gigafactory.

Supply Chain

Our vehicles use over 3,000 purchased parts which we source globally from over 350 suppliers. We have developed close relationships with several key suppliers particularly in the procurement of cells and certain other key system parts. While we obtain components from multiple sources in some cases, similar to other automobile manufacturers, many of the components used in our vehicles are purchased by us from a single source. In addition, while several sources of the battery cell we have selected for our battery packs are available, we have currently fully qualified only one cell for the battery packs we use in our production vehicles. We are working to fully qualify additional cells from other manufacturers.

9

We use various raw materials in our business including aluminum, steel, cobalt, nickel and copper. The prices for these raw materials fluctuate depending on market conditions and global demand for these materials. We believe that we have adequate supplies or sources of availability of the raw materials necessary to meet our manufacturing and supply requirements.

Governmental Programs, Incentives and Regulations

California Alternative Energy and Advanced Transportation Financing Authority Tax Incentives

We have entered into agreements in 2012, 2013, and 2015 with the California Alternative Energy and Advanced Transportation Financing Authority (CAEATFA) that each provide multi-year sales tax exclusions on purchases of manufacturing equipment that will be used for specific purposes including the expansion and ongoing development of Model S, Model X and future electric vehicles and expansion of electric vehicle powertrain production in California. We estimate the combined tax savings under these agreements will be approximately $98 million, of which $56 million has been realized as of December 31, 2015.

Nevada Tax Incentives

In connection with the construction of the Gigafactory in Nevada, we have entered into agreements with the State of Nevada and Storey County in Nevada that will provide abatements for sales and use taxes, real and personal property taxes, and employer excise taxes, discounts to the base tariff energy rates, and transferable tax credits. These incentives will be available for the applicable periods beginning on October 17, 2014 and ending on June 30, 2034, subject to capital investments by Tesla and its partners for the Gigafactory of at least $3.5 billion in the aggregate on or before June 30, 2024, and certain other conditions specified in the agreements. If we do not satisfy one or more conditions under the agreements, Tesla will be required to repay to the respective taxing authorities the amounts of the tax incentives incurred, plus interest.

Tesla Regulatory Credits

In connection with the production, delivery, and placement into service of our zero emission vehicles in global markets, we have earned and will continue to earn various tradable regulatory credits that can be sold to other manufacturers.

Under California抯 Zero-Emission Vehicle Regulations and those of states that have adopted the California standards, vehicle manufacturers are required to ensure that a portion of the vehicles delivered for sale in those states during each model year are zero-emission vehicles and partial zero-emission vehicles. Currently, the states of Arizona, California, Connecticut, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island and Vermont have such laws in effect. These laws provide that a manufacturer may earn credits, referred to as ZEV credits, if they produce more zero-emission vehicles than the minimum quantity required by those laws. Those manufacturers with a surplus of credits may sell the excess credits to other manufacturers who can then apply such credits to comply with the regulatory requirements, including making up for deficits. As a manufacturer solely of zero-emission vehicles, we have no minimum requirement, and therefore earn ZEV credits on each vehicle delivered and placed into service in such states. We have entered into agreements with other automobile manufacturers to sell the ZEV credits that we earn. Recently, California passed amendments to the ZEV mandate that would require, starting in 2018, all large-volume manufacturers (those manufacturers selling 20,000 or more vehicles in California in 2018) to increase the number of zero emission vehicles sold, such that 15.4% of each manufacturers?fleet must be made of zero emission vehicles by 2025. All states that have adopted the California program will amend their programs to conform to the new California standards.

Additionally, under the Environmental Protection Agency抯 (EPA) national greenhouse gas (GHG) emission standards and similar standards adopted by the Canadian government, car and truck manufacturers are required to meet fleet-wide average carbon dioxide emissions standards. Manufacturers who fail to meet such standards have a deficit in their emission profile. Manufacturers whose fleet wide average performs better than such standards may earn credits. Manufacturers may sell excess credits to other manufacturers, who can use the credits to comply with these regulatory requirements. As a manufacturer solely of zero emission vehicles, we earn the full amount of GHG credits established by the standards on each vehicle sold. We have contracted with another automobile manufacturer to sell all earned credits.

Under the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration抯 (NHTSA) Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards, car and truck manufacturers are required to meet fleet-wide average fuel economy standards. Manufacturers that fail to meet such standards have a deficit in their fuel economy profile. Manufacturers whose fleet-wide average performs better than such standards may earn credits. Manufacturers may sell excess credits to other manufacturers, who can use such credits to comply with these regulatory requirements. We have entered into agreements to sell the credits that we earn.

Regulation梀ehicle Safety and Testing

Our vehicles are subject to, and comply with or are otherwise exempt from, numerous regulatory requirements established by NHTSA, including all applicable United States Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS). Model S and Model X fully comply with all FMVSSs without the need for any exemptions.

10

As a manufacturer, we must self-certify that our vehicles meet all applicable FMVSS, as well as the NHTSA bumper standard, or otherwise are exempt, before the vehicles can be imported or sold in the United States. Numerous FMVSS apply to our vehicles, such as crash-worthiness requirements, crash avoidance requirements, and electric vehicle requirements. We are also required to comply with other federal laws administered by NHTSA, including the CAFE standards, Theft Prevention Act requirements, consumer information labeling requirements, Early Warning Reporting requirements regarding warranty claims, field reports, death and injury reports and foreign recalls, and owner抯 manual requirements.

The Automobile Information and Disclosure Act requires manufacturers of motor vehicles to disclose certain information regarding the manufacturer抯 suggested retail price, optional equipment and pricing. In addition, the Act allows inclusion of city and highway fuel economy ratings, as determined by EPA, as well as crash test ratings as determined by NHTSA if such tests are conducted.

Our vehicles sold in outside of the U.S. are subject to foreign safety testing regulations. Many of those regulations are different from the federal motor vehicle safety standards applicable in the United States and may require redesign and/or retesting.

Regulation桞attery Safety and Testing

Our battery pack conforms to mandatory regulations that govern transport of 揹angerous goods? defined to include lithium-ion batteries, which may present a risk in transportation. The regulations vary by mode of shipping transportation, such as by ocean vessel, rail, truck, or air. We have completed the applicable transportation tests for our battery packs, demonstrating our compliance with applicable regulations.

We use lithium metal oxide cells in our high voltage battery packs. The cells do not contain any lead, mercury, cadmium, other hazardous materials, heavy metals, or toxic materials. Our battery packs include certain packaging materials that contain trace amounts of hazardous chemicals whose use, storage, and disposal is regulated under federal law. We currently have an agreement with a third party battery recycling company to recycle our battery packs. If a customer wishes to dispose of a battery pack from one of our vehicles, we anticipate accepting the depleted battery from the customer without any additional charge.

Automobile Manufacturer and Dealer Regulation

State laws regulate the manufacture, distribution, and sale of automobiles, and generally require motor vehicle manufacturers and dealers to be licensed in order to sell vehicles directly to consumers in the state. As we open additional Tesla stores and service centers, we secure dealer licenses (or their equivalent) and engage in sales activities to sell our vehicles directly to consumers. A few states, such as Texas and Michigan, do not permit automobile manufacturers to be licensed as dealers or to act in the capacity of a dealer, or otherwise restrict a manufacturer抯 ability to deliver or service vehicles. To sell vehicles to residents of states where we are not licensed as a dealer, we generally conduct the sale out of the state via the internet, phone or mail. In such states, we have opened 揼alleries?that serve an educational purpose and are not retail locations.

As we expand our retail footprint in the United States, some automobile dealer trade associations have both challenged the legality of our operations in court and used administrative and legislative processes to attempt to prohibit or limit our ability to operate existing stores or expand to new locations. Although we have thus far prevailed in every lawsuit brought by dealer associations, we expect that the dealer associations will continue to mount challenges to our business model. In addition, we expect the dealer associations to actively lobby state licensing agencies and legislators to interpret existing laws or enact new laws in ways not favorable to Tesla抯 ownership and operation of its own retail and service locations.

While we have analyzed the principal laws in the US, EU, China, Japan, UK, and Australia relating to our distribution model and believe we comply with such laws, we have not performed a complete analysis of all jurisdictions in which we may sell vehicles. Accordingly, there may be laws in certain jurisdictions that may restrict our sales and service operations.

Competition

The worldwide automotive market, particularly for alternative fuel vehicles, is highly competitive today and we expect it will become even more so in the future as we introduce additional, lower priced vehicles such as our Model 3.

We believe the primary competitive factors in our markets include but are not limited to:

 

?

technological innovation;

 

?

product quality and safety;

 

?

service options;

 

?

product performance;

 

?

design and styling;

 

?

brand perception;

11

 

?

product price; and

 

?

manufacturing efficiency.

We believe that our vehicles compete in the market both based on their traditional segment classification as well as based on their propulsion technology. For example, Model S competes primarily in the extremely competitive premium sedan market with internal combustion vehicles from more established automobile manufacturers, including Audi, BMW, Lexus and Mercedes. Our vehicles also compete with vehicles propelled by alternative fuels, principally electricity.

Many established and new automobile manufacturers have entered or have announced plans to enter the alternative fuel vehicle market. Overall, we believe these announcements and vehicle introductions promote the development of the alternative fuel vehicle market by highlighting the attractiveness of alternative fuel vehicles, particularly those fueled by electricity, relative to the internal combustion vehicle. BMW, Daimler, Nissan, Fiat, Ford and Mitsubishi, among others, have electric vehicles available today. Moreover, Porsche, Lexus, Audi, Volkswagen and Volvo, as well as a number of prospective automobile manufacturers, are also developing electric vehicles. Electric vehicles have also already been brought to market in China and other foreign countries and we expect a number of those manufacturers to enter the United States market as well. In addition, several manufacturers, including General Motors, Toyota, Ford, and Honda, are each selling hybrid vehicles, and certain of these manufacturers have announced plug-in versions of their hybrid vehicles.

The market for energy storage products is also highly competitive. Established companies as well as emerging companies have introduced products that are similar to our product portfolio. For instance, there are several companies providing individual components of energy storage systems (such as cells, battery modules, and power electronics) as well as others providing integrated systems.

Most of our current and potential competitors in both the automotive and energy storage markets have significantly greater resources than we do, may be able to devote greater resources to the manufacture, sale and support of their products, and have other advantages. We believe our exclusive focus on electric vehicles, electric vehicle components and energy storage products, as well as our history of vehicle development and production, however, are the basis on which we can compete in the global automotive market in spite of the challenges posed by our competition.

Intellectual Property

As part of our business, we seek to protect our intellectual property rights in various ways, including through trademarks, copyrights, trade secrets, including know-how, patents, patent applications, employee and third party nondisclosure agreements, intellectual property licenses and other contractual rights. Additionally, consistent with our mission to accelerate the advent of sustainable transport, we announced a patent policy in which we irrevocably pledged that we will not initiate a lawsuit against any party for infringing our patents through activity relating to electric vehicles or related equipment for so long as such party is acting in good faith. We made this pledge in order to encourage the advancement of a common, rapidly-evolving platform for electric vehicles, thereby benefiting ourselves, other companies making electric vehicles, and the world.

Segment Information

We operate as one reportable segment which is the design, development, manufacturing and sales of electric vehicles.

Employees

As of December 31, 2015, we had 13,058 full-time employees. To date, we have not experienced any work stoppages, and we consider our relationship with our employees to be good.

Available Information

We file or furnish periodic reports and amendments thereto, including our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K; proxy statements and other information with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Such reports, amendments, proxy statements and other information may be obtained by visiting the Public Reference Room of the SEC at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, D.C. 20549. Information on the operation of the Public Reference Room can be obtained by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. In addition, the SEC maintains a website (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file electronically. Our reports, amendments thereto, proxy statements and other information are also made available, free of charge, on our investor relations website at ir.teslamotors.com as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file or furnish such information with the SEC. The information posted on our website is not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K.

 

 

12

ITEM 1A.

RISK FACTORS

You should carefully consider the risks described below together with the other information set forth in this report, which could materially affect our business, financial condition and future results. The risks described below are not the only risks facing our company. Risks and uncertainties not currently known to us or that we currently deem to be immaterial also may materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and operating results.

Risks Related to Our Business and Industry

We may experience significant delays or other complications in the design, manufacture, launch and production ramp of new vehicles such as Model X and future vehicles such as Model 3, which could harm our brand, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

We may experience significant delays or other complications in bringing to market and ramping production of new vehicles, such as Model X. While we commenced Model X deliveries late in the third quarter of 2015, we have only recently begun manufacturing Model X vehicles, and various factors could result in delays in its production ramp, including the capacity of our suppliers to deliver us components at the timing and volumes we require and production limitations that are needed to maintain our quality production standards. In addition, since Model X shares certain production facilities with the Model S, the volume or efficiency of Model S production may be impacted if the ramp of Model X is not as efficient as we plan.

We have experienced delays or other complications in connection with new vehicle models in the past, such as production ramp delays for Model S in 2012 and the All-Wheel Drive Dual Motor Model S, and the launch of Model X. Any significant additional delay or other complication in the ramp of Model X or the development, manufacture, launch and production ramp of our future vehicles, including complications associated with expanding our production capacity, supply chain or regulatory approvals, could materially damage our brand, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

The complexity in our business continues to grow as we introduce new products and variants.

We have limited experience simultaneously designing, testing, manufacturing, upgrading, adapting and selling our electric vehicles as well as limited experience allocating our available resources among the design and production of multiple vehicles, such as Model S, Model X and Model 3, and the variants thereof. In the past, when we have added complexity to our production line, we have occasionally experienced unexpected delays. Similar problems may occur in the future as we simultaneously produce Model X and Model S vehicles, as well as future vehicles and Tesla Energy products.

We may be unable to meet our production and delivery plans for Model S and Model X, both of which could harm our business and prospects.

We have significantly increased vehicle production and deliveries, and our plans call for significant increases in vehicle production and deliveries going forward. Our ability to further increase vehicle production, including the ramp of Model X production, will depend upon a number of factors, including our ability to use new manufacturing processes as planned while maintaining our desired quality levels, our suppliers?ability to deliver sufficient volumes of quality parts to us in a timely manner, and carefully but efficiently making design and production changes to ensure consistently high quality. Certain suppliers have historically experienced delays in meeting our demand or have sought to renegotiate the terms of the supply arrangements, and we continue to focus on supplier capabilities and constraints. While our plans call for us to significantly increase vehicle production and deliveries in a short amount of time, we may be unable to do so. Any delays or disruption in our production of Model S and Model X in line with our plans could materially damage our brand, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

In addition, we have introduced a number of new manufacturing technologies and techniques for our vehicles, such as aluminum spot welding systems and high-speed blow forming of certain difficult to stamp vehicle parts. Our vehicles also have unique design features, such as a 17 inch display screen, retractable exterior door handles, and all-new dual motor and autopilot hardware introduced in Model S and falcon-wing doors and other unique features introduced in Model X, each of which poses different manufacturing challenges.

Concurrent with the significant increase in our planned vehicle production levels, we will also need to continue to significantly increase deliveries of our vehicles. We have limited experience in delivering a high volume of vehicles, and we may face difficulties meeting our delivery and growth plans into both existing markets as well as new markets into which we expand. If we are unable to ramp up to meet our delivery goals globally, this could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Finally, detailed long-term testing of quality, reliability and durability of our vehicles is ongoing, and in the case of Model X vehicles has only recently commenced, and any negative results from such testing could cause production or delivery delays or cost increases.

13

Our long-term success will be dependent upon our ability to achieve market acceptance of our vehicles, including Model S and Model X, and new vehicle models such as Model 3.

There is no guarantee that Model S, Model X or our future vehicles such as Model 3 will continue to be successfully accepted by the general public, especially in the long-term. Although we have successfully grown demand for Model S to date and have seen strong initial demand for Model X, and we believe that we will be able to continue to grow demand for these vehicles, there is no guarantee that future demand for Model S or Model X will meet our expectations.

Additionally, we have limited experience in introducing new vehicles. Although our reservation conversion rate for Model X has been strong, we have only recently commenced production and deliveries of Model X. To the extent that we are not able to build Model X in accordance with consumer expectations, customers may cancel their reservations and our future sales could be harmed.

While we believe that there will continue to be separate and strong demand for both Model S and Model X, we have limited experience in selling multiple vehicle models at the same time. Although we believe that each of our vehicles and their variants meet a distinct segment of the automotive market, if our vehicles end up competing with one another in the market, then our ability to sell each vehicle model at planned quantities or prices may be impacted.

Beyond Model X, we have announced our intent to develop Model 3, which we intend to offer at a lower price point and to produce at high volumes. We have not yet finalized the design, engineering or material and component sourcing plans for Model 3. If we are not successful in bringing it to market at the expected price point and the expected volume, our operating results may suffer. Additionally, while we expect Model 3 to be an extremely popular vehicle, we do not know what long-term demand for Model 3 will be and whether it will meet our expectations. Furthermore, the market for vehicles in the price range we expect for Model 3 is larger, but more competitive, than the markets for Model S and Model X.

Problems or delays in bringing the Gigafactory online and operating it in line with our expectations could negatively affect the production and profitability of our products, such as Model 3 or Tesla Energy products.

To lower the cost of cell production and produce cells in high volume, we intend to integrate the production of lithium-ion cells and finished battery packs for our vehicles, including Model 3, and Tesla Energy products at our new Gigafactory. We have limited experience in building a factory, and no direct experience in the production of lithium-ion cells. Also, the cost and complexity of building and operating the Gigafactory could exceed our current expectations and the Gigafactory may take longer to bring online for lithium-ion cell and battery pack production than we anticipate. If we are unable to build the Gigafactory in a timely manner to produce high volumes of quality lithium-ion cells at reasonable prices, our ability to supply battery packs to our vehicle and other products according to our schedule and/or at a price that allows us to sell them profitably and in the quantities we estimate could be constrained. Any such problems or delays with the Gigafactory could negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

If our vehicles or vehicles that contain our powertrains fail to perform as expected, our ability to develop, market and sell our electric vehicles could be harmed.

If our vehicles or vehicles that contain our powertrains were to contain defects in design and manufacture that cause them not to perform as expected or that require repair, our ability to develop, market and sell our vehicles could be harmed. For example, the operation of our vehicles is highly dependent on software, which is inherently complex and could conceivably contain defects and errors. Issues that have historically been experienced by customers include those related to the software for the 17 inch display screen, the panoramic roof and the 12 volt battery in the Model S. Although we attempt to remedy any issues we observe in our vehicles as effectively and as rapidly as possible, such efforts may not be timely, may hamper production or may not be up to the satisfaction of our customers. While we have performed extensive internal testing, we currently have a limited frame of reference by which to evaluate the long-term performance of our battery packs, powertrains, vehicles and Tesla Energy products. There can be no assurance that we will be able to detect and fix any defects in our products prior to their sale to consumers.

Any vehicle product defects or any other failure of our vehicles to perform as expected could harm our reputation and result in delivery delays, product recalls, product liability claims, significant warranty and other expenses, and could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, operating results and prospects. Our Model X vehicles have not yet been evaluated by NHTSA for its 5-Star Safety Ratings, and while based on our internal testing we expect to obtain comparable ratings to those achieved by Model S, there is no assurance this will occur.

We are dependent on our suppliers, the majority of which are single source suppliers, and the inability of these suppliers to continue to deliver, or their refusal to deliver, necessary components of our vehicles in a timely manner at prices, quality levels, and volumes acceptable to us would have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.

Model S and Model X contain numerous purchased parts which we source globally from hundreds of direct suppliers, the majority of whom are currently single source suppliers despite efforts to qualify and obtain components from multiple sources whenever possible. Furthermore, we do not maintain long-term agreements with a number of our suppliers.

14

While we may be able to establish alternate supply relationships or engineer replacement components for our single source components, we may be unable to do so in the short term, or at all, at prices or costs that are favorable to us. In particular, while we believe that we will be able to secure alternate sources of supply for most of our single sourced components in a relatively short time frame, qualifying alternate suppliers or developing our own replacements for certain highly customized components of our vehicles may be time consuming, costly and may force us to make additional modifications to a vehicle抯 design.

This limited supply chain exposes us to multiple potential sources of delivery failure or component shortages for the production of our vehicles and powertrain components. We may experience delays due to supply chain disruptions with respect to Model S, Model X, Model 3 and any other future vehicle we may produce, such as those we experienced in 2012 in connection with our slower-than-anticipated Model S ramp. In addition, our currently ongoing transition from low to high volume production tooling for Model X may take longer than expected which may adversely impact our short-term financial results.

Changes in business conditions, labor issues, wars, governmental changes, natural disasters such as the March 2011 earthquakes in Japan and other factors beyond our control or which we do not presently anticipate, could also affect our suppliers?ability to deliver components to us on a timely basis. Furthermore, if we experience significantly increased demand, or need to replace certain existing suppliers, there can be no assurance that additional supplies of component parts will be available when required on terms that are favorable to us, or that any supplier would allocate sufficient supplies to us in order to meet our requirements or fill our orders in a timely manner, or that we could engineer replacement components ourselves.

Changes in our supply chain have resulted in the past, and may result in the future, in increased cost. We have also experienced cost increases from certain of our suppliers in order to meet our quality targets and development timelines as well as due to design changes that we made, and we may experience similar cost increases in the future. Additionally, we are negotiating with existing suppliers for cost reductions, seeking new and less expensive suppliers for certain parts, and attempting to redesign certain parts to make them less expensive to produce. If we are unsuccessful in our efforts to control and reduce supplier costs, our operating results will suffer. 

Finally, in October 2013, we entered into an amendment to our existing supply agreement with Panasonic Corporation in order to address our anticipated short- to medium-term lithium-ion battery cell needs. While we expect that this supply agreement, as amended, will provide us with sufficient cells for the next few years, we may not be able to meet our long-term needs, including for Model 3 and other programs we may introduce, without securing additional suppliers or other sources for cells. We have signed an agreement with Panasonic to be our partner in the Gigafactory and be responsible for, among other things, manufacturing cells from there for use in our products. If we encounter unexpected difficulties with our current suppliers, including Panasonic, and if we are unable to fill these needs from other suppliers, we could experience production delays, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.

Our future growth is dependent upon consumers?willingness to adopt electric vehicles.

Our growth is highly dependent upon the adoption by consumers of alternative fuel vehicles in general and electric vehicles in particular. If the market for electric vehicles does not develop as we expect, or develops more slowly than we expect, our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results will be harmed. The market for alternative fuel vehicles is relatively new, rapidly evolving, and subject to numerous external factors, such as:

 

?

perceptions about electric vehicle quality, safety, performance, cost, and the convenience of charging;

 

?

perceptions about the limited range over which electric vehicles may be driven on a single battery charge;

 

?

the availability of other types of alternative fuel vehicles, including plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, improvements in the fuel economy of the internal combustion engine;

 

?

volatility in the cost of oil and gasoline;

 

?

government regulations and economic incentives;

 

?

and access to charging facilities.

If we fail to manage future growth effectively as we rapidly grow our company, especially internationally, we may not be able to produce, market, sell and service our vehicles successfully.

Any failure to manage our growth effectively could materially and adversely affect our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. We continue to expand our operations significantly internationally, particularly in Asia. Our future operating results depend to a large extent on our ability to manage this expansion and growth successfully. Risks that we face in undertaking this global expansion include controlling expenses; establishing sufficient sales, service and Supercharger facilities in a timely manner; adapting our products to meet local requirements; implementing the required infrastructure, systems and processes; and finding and hiring a significant number of additional personnel, including manufacturing personnel, design personnel, engineers and service technicians.

15

If we are unable to adequately reduce the manufacturing costs of Model S, control manufacturing costs for Model X, or otherwise control the costs associated with operating our business, our financial condition and operating results will suffer.

As we have gradually ramped production of Model S, manufacturing costs per vehicle have decreased. While we expect ongoing cost reductions to be realized by both us and our suppliers, there is no guarantee we will be able to achieve sufficient cost savings to reach our gross margin and profitability goals. We incur significant costs related to procuring the raw materials required to manufacture our vehicles, assembling vehicles and compensating our personnel. We may also incur substantial costs or cost overruns in increasing the production capability of our Model S, Model X and powertrain manufacturing facilities. Furthermore, if we are unable to produce Model X pursuant to our plan due to cost overruns or other unexpected costs, we may not be able to meet our gross margin and other financial targets.

Furthermore, many of the factors that impact our operating costs are beyond our control, such as potential increases in the costs of our raw materials and components, such as lithium-ion battery cells or aluminum used to produce body panels. If we are unable to keep our operating costs aligned with the level of revenues we generate, our operating results, business and prospects will be harmed.

We may fail to meet our publicly announced guidance or other expectations about our business, which would cause our stock price to decline.

We occasionally provide guidance regarding our expected financial and business performance, such as projections regarding sales and production, as well as anticipated future revenues, gross margins, profitability and cash flows. Correctly identifying key factors affecting business conditions and predicting future events is inherently an uncertain process and our guidance may not ultimately be accurate. Our guidance is based on certain assumptions such as those relating to anticipated production and sales volumes and average sales prices, supplier and commodity costs, and planned cost reductions. If our guidance is not accurate or varies from actual results due to our inability to meet our assumptions or the impact on our financial performance that could occur as a result of various risks and uncertainties, the market value of our common stock could decline significantly.

Our vehicles make use of lithium-ion battery cells, which have been observed to catch fire or vent smoke and flame, and such events have raised concerns, and future events may lead to additional concerns, about the batteries used in automotive applications.

The battery packs that we produce make use of lithium-ion cells. On rare occasions, lithium-ion cells can rapidly release the energy they contain by venting smoke and flames in a manner that can ignite nearby materials as well as other lithium-ion cells.

While we have designed the battery pack to passively contain any single cell抯 release of energy without spreading to neighboring cells.  There can be no assurance that a field or testing failure of our vehicles or other battery packs that we produce will not occur, which could subject us to lawsuits, product recalls, or redesign efforts, all of which would be time consuming and expensive. Also, negative public perceptions regarding the suitability of lithium-ion cells for automotive applications or any future incident involving lithium-ion cells such as a vehicle or other fire, even if such incident does not involve our vehicles, could seriously harm our business.

In addition, we store a significant number of lithium-ion cells at our manufacturing facility. Any mishandling of battery cells may cause disruption to the operation of our facilities. While we have implemented safety procedures related to the handling of the cells, there can be no assurance that a safety issue or fire related to the cells would not disrupt our operations. Such damage or injury would likely lead to adverse publicity and potentially a safety recall. Moreover, any failure of a competitor抯 electric vehicle may cause indirect adverse publicity for us and our electric vehicles. Such adverse publicity would negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

We are exposed to fluctuations in currency exchange rates, which could negatively affect our financial results

Our revenues and costs denominated in foreign currencies are not completely matched. As we have increased Model S deliveries in markets outside of the United States, we have much higher revenues than costs denominated in other currencies such as the euro, Norwegian kroner, Chinese yuan and Canadian dollar. The recent strengthening of the U.S. dollar therefore has reduced, and any further strengthening of the U.S. dollar would tend to further reduce our revenues as measured in U.S. dollars. In addition, a portion of our costs and expenses have been, and we anticipate will continue to be, denominated in foreign currencies, including the Japanese yen. If we do not have fully offsetting revenues in these currencies and if the value of the U.S. dollar depreciates significantly against these currencies, our costs as measured in U.S. dollars as a percent of our revenues will correspondingly increase and our margins will suffer. As a result, our operating results could be adversely affected.

16

Our resale value guarantee and leasing programs expose us to the risk that the resale values of vehicles returned to us are lower than our estimates and may result in lower revenues, gross margin, profitability and liquidity.

We offer resale value guarantees to many of our customers, under which such customers may sell their vehicles back to us at certain points in time at pre-determined resale values. Customers can lease our vehicles through both leasing partners and from us directly, through our captive finance companies. The resale values of any vehicles resold or returned to us pursuant to these programs may be lower than our estimates, which are based on a limited secondary market for our vehicles. If the volume of vehicles returned to us is higher than our estimates and/or we are not able to resell them, timely or at all, our liquidity could be negatively impacted. In cases where customers retain their vehicles past the guarantee period, our gross margin will be negatively impacted as all remaining revenues and costs related to the vehicle will be recognized at no gross profit.

We apply lease accounting on sales of vehicles with a resale value guarantee and on leases made directly by us. Under lease accounting, we recognize the associated revenues and costs of the vehicle sale over time rather than fully upfront at vehicle delivery. As a result, these programs generate lower revenues in the period the car is delivered and higher gross margins during the period of the resale value guarantee as compared to purchases in which the resale value guarantee does not apply. A higher than anticipated uptake under these programs could therefore have an adverse impact on our near term revenues and operating results. Moreover, unlike the resale value guarantee program or programs with leasing partners which do not impact our cash flows and liquidity at the time of vehicle delivery, under a lease held directly by us, we may receive only a very small portion of the total vehicle purchase price at the time of lease, followed by a stream of payments over the term of the lease. To the extent we expand our leasing program without securing external financing or business partners to support such expansion, our cash flow and liquidity could also be negatively impacted.

If we fail to effectively manage the residual, financing and credit risks related to our direct Tesla leasing programs our business may suffer.

We offer financing arrangements through our local subsidiaries in the United States, Canada, Germany and the UK, including leasing directly through certain of those subsidiaries. The profitability of the leasing program depends on our ability to accurately project residual values, secure adequate financing and/or business partners to fund and grow this program, and manage customer credit risk. If actual residual values of our vehicles are below our estimates, we may suffer lower profitability or potentially have losses. If we are unable to adequately fund our leasing program with either internal funds or external financing sources, we may be unable to grow our sales. Additionally, if we do not properly screen customers for their creditworthiness, we may be exposed to excessive credit risks and associated losses. Furthermore, if our leasing business grows substantially, our business may suffer if we cannot effectively manage the greater levels of residual and credit risks resulting from growth. Finally, if we do not successfully monitor and comply with applicable national, state and/or local financial regulations and consumer protection laws governing lease transactions, we may become subject to enforcement actions or penalties, either of which may harm our business.

Increases in costs, disruption of supply or shortage of raw materials, in particular lithium-ion cells, could harm our business.

We may experience increases in the cost or a sustained interruption in the supply or shortage of raw materials. Any such increase or supply interruption could materially and negatively impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. We use various raw materials in our business including aluminum, steel, nickel and copper. The prices for these raw materials fluctuate depending on market conditions and global demand for these materials and could adversely affect our business and operating results. For instance, we are exposed to multiple risks relating to lithium-ion cells. These risks include:

 

?

the inability or unwillingness of current battery manufacturers to build or operate battery cell manufacturing plants to supply the numbers of lithium-ion cells we require;

 

?

disruption in the supply of cells due to quality issues or recalls by battery cell manufacturers;

 

?

an increase in the cost of raw materials used in the cells; and

 

?

fluctuations in the value of the Japanese yen against the U.S. dollar as our battery cell purchases are currently denominated in Japanese yen. 

Our business is dependent on the continued supply of battery cells for the battery packs used in our vehicles and energy storage products. While we believe several sources of the battery cells are available for such battery packs, we have fully qualified only a very limited number of suppliers for the cells used in such battery packs and have very limited flexibility in changing cell suppliers. In particular, we have fully qualified only one supplier for the cells used in battery packs for our production vehicles. Any disruption in the supply of battery cells from such vendors could disrupt production of our vehicles and of the battery packs we produce for other automobile manufacturers until such time as a different supplier is fully qualified. Furthermore, fluctuations or shortages in petroleum and other economic conditions may cause us to experience significant increases in freight charges and raw material costs. Substantial increases in the prices for our raw materials or prices charged to us, such as those charged by our battery cell manufacturers, would increase our operating costs, and could reduce our margins if we cannot recoup the increased costs through increased vehicle prices. Any attempts to increase vehicle prices in response to increased raw material costs could result in cancellations of vehicle orders and reservations and therefore materially and adversely affect our brand, image, business, prospects and operating results.

17

We may become subject to product liability claims, which could harm our financial condition and liquidity if we are not able to successfully defend or insure against such claims.

Product liability claims could harm our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. The automobile industry experiences significant product liability claims and we face inherent risk of exposure to claims in the event our vehicles do not perform as expected resulting in personal injury or death. We also may face claims related to any misuse or failures of our new autopilot technology. A successful product liability claim against us with respect to any aspect of our vehicles could require us to pay a substantial monetary award. Our risks in this area are particularly pronounced given the limited number of vehicles delivered to date and limited field experience of those vehicles. Moreover, a product liability claim could generate substantial negative publicity about our vehicles and business and would have material adverse effect on our brand, business, prospects and operating results. We self-insure against the risk of product liability claims, meaning that any product liability claims will have to be paid from company funds, not by insurance.

The automotive market is highly competitive, and we may not be successful in competing in this industry. We currently face competition from new and established U.S. and international competitors and expect to face competition from others in the future, including competition from companies with new technology.

The worldwide automotive market, particularly for alternative fuel vehicles, is highly competitive today and we expect it will become even more so in the future. Many established and new automobile manufacturers have entered or have announced plans to enter the alternative fuel vehicle market. For example, BMW, Daimler, Nissan and many other large companies have announced or are also reported to be developing electric vehicles. In addition, several manufacturers, including General Motors, Toyota, Ford and Honda, are selling hybrid vehicles, including plug-in hybrid vehicles. Most of our current and potential competitors have significantly greater financial, technical, manufacturing, marketing and other resources than we do and may be able to devote greater resources to the design, development, manufacturing, distribution, promotion, sale and support of their products. Virtually all of our competitors have more extensive customer bases and broader customer and industry relationships than we do and almost all of these companies have longer operating histories and greater name recognition than we do. Increased competition could result in lower vehicle unit sales, price reductions, revenue shortfalls, loss of customers and loss of market share, which could harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Demand in the automobile industry is volatile, which may lead to lower vehicle unit sales and adversely affect our operating results.

Volatility of demand in the automobile industry may materially and adversely affect our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. The markets in which we currently compete and plan to compete in the future have been subject to considerable volatility in demand in recent periods, including recent softening of the premium sedan category. As a low volume vehicle producer, we have less financial resources than more established automobile manufacturers to withstand changes in the market and disruptions in demand. Volatility in demand may lead to lower vehicle unit sales and increased inventory, which may result in further downward price pressure and adversely affect our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. These effects may have a more pronounced impact on our business given our relatively smaller scale and financial resources as compared to many incumbent automobile manufacturers.

If we are unable to establish and maintain confidence in our long-term business prospects among consumers, analysts and within our industry, then our financial condition, operating results, business prospects and stock price may suffer materially.

Consumers may be less likely to purchase our vehicles now if they are not convinced that our business will succeed or that our operations will continue for many years. Similarly, suppliers and other third parties will be less likely to invest time and resources in developing business relationships with us if they are not convinced that our business will succeed. Accordingly, in order to build and maintain our business, we must maintain confidence among customers, suppliers, analysts and other parties in our liquidity and long-term business prospects. Maintaining such confidence may be particularly complicated by certain factors, such as our limited operating history, unfamiliarity with our products, competition and uncertainty regarding the future of electric vehicles. Many of these factors are largely outside our control, and any negative perceptions about our long-term business prospects, even if exaggerated or unfounded, would likely harm our business and make it more difficult to raise additional funds if needed.

Our vehicles have unique servicing requirements, and we are using a different service model from the one typically used in the automobile industry. If we are unable to address the service requirements of our existing and future customers, our business will be materially and adversely affected.

Servicing electric vehicles is different than servicing vehicles with internal combustion engines and requires specialized skills, including high voltage training and servicing techniques. If we are unable to satisfactorily service our vehicles, our ability to generate customer loyalty, grow our business and sell additional vehicles could be impaired.

18

We service our vehicles through our company-owned Tesla service centers, certain of our stores, and through our mobile service technicians known as the Tesla Rangers. We will need to open new standalone service centers in locations around the world and hire and train significant numbers of new employees to staff these service centers and act as Tesla Rangers in order to successfully maintain our fleet of delivered vehicles. If we do not continue to adequately address the service requirements of our customers to their satisfaction, particularly as the volume of vehicles we are able to deliver annually increases, our business would be harmed.

Our plan to expand our network of Tesla stores, service centers and Superchargers will require significant cash investments and management resources and may not meet our expectations with respect to additional sales of our electric vehicles. In addition, we may not be able to open stores or service centers in certain states or Superchargers in desired locations.

Our plan to expand our network of Tesla stores, service centers and Superchargers will require significant cash investments and management resources and may not meet our expectations with respect to additional sales of our vehicles. This ongoing global expansion may not have the desired effect of increasing sales and expanding our brand presence to the degree we are anticipating. We will also need to ensure we are in compliance with any regulatory requirements applicable to the sale and service of our vehicles in those jurisdictions, which could take considerable time and expense. If we experience any delays in expanding our network of Tesla stores, service centers and Superchargers, this could lead to a decrease in sales of our vehicles and could negatively impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

We face risks associated with our international operations and expansion, including unfavorable regulatory, political, tax and labor conditions and establishing ourselves in new markets, all of which could harm our business.

We currently have international operations and subsidiaries in various countries and jurisdictions that are subject to the legal, political, regulatory and social requirements and economic conditions in these jurisdictions. Additionally, as part of our growth strategy, we will continue to expand our sales, service and Supercharger locations internationally. We have limited experience, however, selling and servicing our products internationally, as well as limited experience installing and operating Superchargers internationally. Furthermore, international expansion requires us to make significant expenditures, including the establishment of local operating entities, hiring of local employees and establishing facilities in advance of generating any revenue.

We are subject to a number of risks associated with international business activities that may increase our costs, impact our ability to sell our electric vehicles and require significant management attention. These risks include conforming our vehicles to various international regulatory and safety requirements, difficulty in establishing, staffing and managing foreign operations, challenges in attracting customers, foreign government taxes, regulations and permit requirements, our ability to enforce our contractual rights; trade restrictions, customs regulations, tariffs and price or exchange controls, and preferences of foreign nations for domestically produced vehicles.

Additionally, as we have expanded into new international markets, we historically faced challenges with ensuring that our charging equipment works successfully with the charging infrastructure in such markets, including in Norway and China. If customers experience problems with the way our charging equipment works with the local charging infrastructure, or we are unable to adapt our equipment to resolve such problems, then the viability and acceptance of our vehicles in such markets could be materially and adversely affected. If we fail to successfully address these risks, our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition could be materially harmed.

The unavailability, reduction or elimination of government and economic incentives in the U.S. and abroad supporting the development and adoption of electric vehicles could have some impact on demand for our vehicles.

We currently benefit from certain government and economic incentives supporting the development and adoption of electric vehicles. In the United States and abroad, such incentives include, among other things, tax credits or rebates that encourage the purchase of electric vehicles. In Norway, for example, the purchase of electric vehicles is not currently subject to import taxes, taxes on non-recurring vehicle fees, the 25% value added tax or the purchase taxes that apply to the purchase of gas-powered vehicles. Notably, the quantum of incentive programs promoting electric vehicles is a tiny fraction of the amount of incentives that are provided to gas-powered vehicles through the oil and gas industries, notwithstanding that the former promotes social good while the latter contributes to significant social harm.  Nevertheless, even the limited benefits from such programs could be reduced, eliminated or exhausted.  For example, on January 1, 2016, a previously available incentive in Denmark that favored the purchase of electric vehicles expired and was replaced with a newly phased-in incentive that is less generous than the incentive that it replaced. In certain circumstances, there is pressure from the oil and gas lobby or related special interests to bring about such developments, which could have some negative impact on demand for our vehicles.

19

Our strategic relationships with third parties, such as Panasonic, are subject to various risks which could adversely affect our business and future prospects.

Our strategic relationships with third parties, such as Panasonic which supplies us with battery cells for use in Model S and Model X and which is our strategic partner in the Gigafactory, pose various risks to us, including potential loss of access to important technology and parts for producing, servicing and supporting our products, potential loss of business and adverse publicity. Moreover, factors that may not be within our partners?control, such as materials pricing, may impact our ability to realize the goals of certain strategic relationships, such as cost and gross margin targets. In addition, these third parties may not perform as expected under our agreements with them, such as with respect to quality of production parts and timeliness of their deliveries, and we may have disagreements or disputes with these third parties. The occurrence of any of the foregoing could adversely affect our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

If we are unable to attract and/or retain key employees and hire qualified personnel, our ability to compete could be harmed.

The loss of the services of any of our key employees could disrupt our operations, delay the development and introduction of our vehicles and services, and negatively impact our business, prospects and operating results. In particular, we are highly dependent on the services of Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer, and JB Straubel, our Chief Technical Officer.

None of our key employees is bound by an employment agreement for any specific term and we may not be able to successfully attract and retain senior leadership necessary to grow our business. Our future success depends upon our ability to attract and retain executive officers and other key technology, sales, marketing, engineering, manufacturing and support personnel and any failure to do so could adversely impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Key talent may leave Tesla due to various factors, such as a very competitive labor market for talented individuals with automotive experience. Currently in California, there is increasing competition for talented individuals with the specialized knowledge of electric vehicles, software engineers, manufacturing engineers and other skilled employees and this competition affects both our ability to retain key employees and hire new ones. Our continued success depends upon our continued ability to hire new employees in a timely manner and retain current employees. Additionally, we compete with both mature and prosperous companies that have far greater financial resources than we do and start-ups and emerging companies that promise short-term growth opportunities. Any difficulties in retaining current employees or recruiting new ones would have an adverse effect on our performance.

We are highly dependent on the services of Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer.

We are highly dependent on the services of Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer, Product Architect, Chairman of our Board of Directors and largest stockholder. Although Mr. Musk spends significant time with Tesla and is highly active in our management, he does not devote his full time and attention to Tesla. Mr. Musk also currently serves as Chief Executive Officer and Chief Technical Officer of Space Exploration Technologies, a developer and manufacturer of space launch vehicles, and Chairman of SolarCity, a solar provider.

We are subject to various environmental and safety laws and regulations that could impose substantial costs upon us and negatively impact our ability to operate our manufacturing facilities.

As an automobile manufacturer, we are subject to complex environmental, health and safety laws and regulations at numerous levels, including laws relating to the use, handling, storage, disposal and human exposure to hazardous materials, both in the United States and abroad. The costs of compliance, including remediating contamination if any is found on our properties, and of any changes to our operations mandated by new laws or amendments to existing laws may be significant. We may also face unexpected delays in obtaining the necessary permits and approvals required by such laws in connection with our manufacturing facilities, which would hinder our operation of these facilities. Such costs and delays may adversely impact our business prospects and operating results. Furthermore, any violations of these laws may result in substantial fines and penalties, remediation costs, third party damages, or a suspension or cessation of our operations.

Our business may be adversely affected by any disruptions caused by union activities.

Although none of our employees is currently represented by a labor union, it is common for employees at automobile companies to belong to a union, which can result in higher employee costs and increased risk of work stoppages. Although we work diligently to provide the best possible work environment for our employees, they may still decide to join or seek recognition to form a labor union, or we may be required to become a union signatory. Furthermore, we are directly or indirectly dependent upon companies with unionized work forces, such as parts suppliers and trucking and freight companies, and work stoppages or strikes organized by such unions could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition or operating results. If a work stoppage occurs, it could delay the manufacture and sale of our products and have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, operating results or financial condition.

20

We are subject to substantial regulation, which is evolving, and unfavorable changes or failure by us to comply with these regulations could substantially harm our business and operating results.

Motor vehicles are subject to substantial regulation under international, federal, state, and local laws. We incur significant costs in complying with these regulations, and may be required to incur additional costs to comply with any changes to such regulations. Also, we are subject to laws and regulations applicable to the import, sale and service of automobiles internationally. For example, we are required to meet vehicle-specific safety standards that are often materially different from U.S. requirements, thus resulting in additional investment into the vehicles and systems to ensure regulatory compliance. This process necessitates that foreign regulatory official抯 review and certify our vehicles prior to market entry. In addition, we must comply with regulations applicable to vehicles after they enter the market, including foreign reporting requirements and recall management systems.

Additionally, we recently released a vehicle software update that delivers a range of new Autopilot features that relieve drivers of the most tedious and potentially dangerous aspects of road travel. As Autopilot is a completely new feature that U.S. and foreign regulators have limited experience with, there is a risk that regulators could take actions impacting whether and how our customers are able to use our vehicles equipped for Autopilot, which could adversely affect our business.

We are subject to various privacy and consumer protection laws.

Our privacy policy is posted on our website, and any failure by us or our vendor or other business partners to comply with it or with federal, state or international privacy, data protection or security laws or regulations could result in regulatory or litigation-related actions against us, legal liability, fines, damages and other costs. Although we take steps to protect the security of our customers?personal information, we may be required to expend significant resources to comply with data breach requirements if third parties improperly obtain and use the personal information of our customers or we otherwise experience a data loss with respect to customers?personal information. A major breach of our network security and systems could have negative consequences for our business and future prospects, including possible fines, penalties and damages, reduced customer demand for our vehicles, and harm to our reputation and brand.

We may be compelled to undertake product recalls or take other actions, which could adversely affect our brand image and financial performance.

Any product recall in the future may result in adverse publicity, damage our brand and adversely affect our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. We previously experienced product recalls in May 2009, October 2010, June 2013 and November 2015, none of which was related to our electric powertrain or that resulted in a vehicle crash or personal injury reported to us. In April 2009, we determined that a condition caused by insufficient torqueing of the rear inner hub flange bolt existed in some of our Tesla Roadsters, as a result of a missed process during the manufacture of the Tesla Roadster glider. In October 2010, we initiated a product recall after the 12 volt, low voltage auxiliary cable in a single vehicle chafed against the edge of a carbon fiber panel in the vehicle causing a short, smoke and possible fire behind the right front headlamp of the vehicle. In June 2013, we initiated a recall of slightly more than one thousand Model S vehicles to inspect and repair rear seat strikers that may have been compromised during the assembly process. Rear seat strikers are used to retain the rear seat backs in an upright position. Failure of this component may have resulted in collapse of the rear seat back during a crash. In November 2015, we initiated a recall after we discovered a single customer-owned Model S with a front seat belt that was not properly connected to the outboard lap pretensioner. Furthermore, in January 2014, we implemented a firmware update to address issues with certain Universal Mobile Connector NEMA 14-50 adapters, which are part of the charging units and are not part of the vehicles themselves, potentially overheating during charging. In the future, we may at various times, voluntarily or involuntarily, initiate a recall if any of our vehicles or our electric powertrain components that we provide to other OEMs, including any systems or parts sourced from our suppliers, prove to be defective or noncompliant with applicable federal motor vehicle safety standards. Such recalls, whether voluntary or involuntary or caused by systems or components engineered or manufactured by us or our suppliers, involve significant expense and diversion of management attention and other resources, and could adversely affect our brand image in our target markets, as well as our business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations.

Our current and future warranty reserves may be insufficient to cover future warranty claims which could adversely affect our financial performance.

If our warranty reserves are inadequate to cover future warranty claims on our vehicles, our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results could be materially and adversely affected. Warranty reserves include management抯 best estimate of the projected costs to repair or to replace items under warranty. These estimates are based on actual claims incurred to-date and an estimate of the nature, frequency and costs of future claims. These estimates are inherently uncertain and changes to our historical or projected experience may cause material changes to our warranty reserves in the future. Subject to separate limited warranties for the supplemental restraint system and battery, we provide a four year or 50,000 mile New Vehicle Limited Warranty for the purchasers of new Model S and Model X vehicles. The New Vehicle Limited Warranty for Model S and Model X also covers the drive unit for eight years and the battery for a period of eight years or 125,000 miles or unlimited miles, depending on the size of the vehicle抯 battery, although the battery抯 charging capacity is not covered under the New Vehicle Limited Warranty or any Extended Service plan.

21

In addition, customers have the opportunity to purchase an Extended Service plan for the period after the end of the New Vehicle Limited Warranty for Model S and Model X to cover additional services for an additional four years or 50,000 miles, provided it is purchased within a specified period of time. The New Vehicle Limited Warranty and Extended Service plans for the Model S and Model X are subject to certain limitations, exclusions or separate warranties, including certain wear items, such as tires, brake pads, paint and general appearance, and battery performance, and is intended to cover parts and labor to repair defects in material or workmanship in the vehicle including the body, chassis, suspension, interior, electronic systems, powertrain and brake system. Additionally, in 2013, as part of our ongoing efforts to improve the customer ownership experience, we expanded the battery pack warranty and also eliminated the annual service requirement that was needed to keep the New Vehicle Limited Warranty in effect. Should this change in warranty coverage lead to an increase in warranty claims, we may need to record additional warranty reserves, which would negatively affect our profitability.

We are currently expanding and improving our information technology systems and use security measures designed to protect our systems against breaches and cyber-attacks. If these efforts are not successful, our business and operations could be disrupted and our operating results and reputation could be harmed.

We are currently expanding and improving our information technology systems, including implementing new internally developed systems, to assist us in the management of our business. In particular, our volume production of multiple vehicles necessitates continued development, maintenance and improvement of our information technology systems in the U.S. and abroad, which include product data management, procurement, inventory management, production planning and execution, sales, service and logistics, dealer management, financial, tax and regulatory compliance systems. The implementation, maintenance and improvement of these systems require significant management time, support and cost. Moreover, there are inherent risks associated with developing, improving and expanding our core systems as well as implementing new systems, including the disruption of our data management, procurement, manufacturing execution, finance, supply chain and sales and service processes. These risks may affect our ability to manage our data and inventory, procure parts or supplies or manufacture, sell, deliver and service vehicles, or achieve and maintain compliance with, or realize available benefits under, tax laws and other applicable regulations. We also maintain information technology measures designed to protect us against system security risks, data breaches and cyber-attacks.

We cannot be sure that these systems or their required functionality will be effectively implemented, maintained or expanded as planned. If we do not successfully implement, maintain or expand these systems as planned, our operations may be disrupted, our ability to accurately and/or timely report our financial results could be impaired, and deficiencies may arise in our internal control over financial reporting, which may impact our ability to certify our financial results. Moreover, our proprietary information could be compromised and our reputation may be adversely affected. If these systems or their functionality do not operate as we expect them to, we may be required to expend significant resources to make corrections or find alternative sources for performing these functions.

Our insurance strategy may not be adequate to protect us from all business risks.

We may be subject, in the ordinary course of business, to losses resulting from products liability, accidents, acts of God and other claims against us, for which we may have no insurance coverage. While we currently maintain general liability, automobile, property, workers?compensation, and directors?and officers?insurance policies, as a general matter, we do not maintain as much insurance coverage as many other companies do, and in some cases, we do not maintain any at all. Additionally, the policies that we do have may include significant deductibles, and we cannot be certain that our insurance coverage will be sufficient to cover all future claims against us. A loss that is uninsured or which exceeds policy limits may require us to pay substantial amounts, which could adversely affect our financial condition and operating results.

Our financial results may vary significantly from period-to-period due to fluctuations in our operating costs.

We expect our period-to-period operating results to vary based on our operating costs which we anticipate will increase significantly in future periods as we, among other things, design, develop and manufacture Model 3, Tesla Energy products and other future products, increase the production capacity at our manufacturing facilities to produce vehicles at higher volumes, including ramping up the production of Model X, develop the Gigafactory, open new Tesla service centers with maintenance and repair capabilities, open new Supercharger locations, increase our sales and marketing activities, and increase our general and administrative functions to support our growing operations. As a result of these factors, we believe that quarter-to-quarter comparisons of our operating results, especially in the short-term, are not necessarily meaningful and that these comparisons cannot be relied upon as indicators of future performance. Moreover, our operating results may not meet expectations of equity research analysts or investors. If any of this occurs, the trading price of our stock could fall substantially, either suddenly or over time.

22

Any unauthorized control or manipulation of our vehicles?systems could result in loss of confidence in us and our vehicles and harm our business.

Our vehicles contain complex information technology systems. For example, our vehicles are designed with built-in data connectivity to accept and install periodic remote updates from us to improve or update the functionality of our vehicles. We have designed, implemented and tested security measures intended to prevent unauthorized access to our information technology networks, our vehicles and their systems. However, hackers have reportedly attempted, and may attempt in the future, to gain unauthorized access to modify, alter and use such networks, vehicles and systems to gain control of, or to change, our vehicles?functionality, user interface and performance characteristics, or to gain access to data stored in or generated by the vehicle. We encourage reporting of potential vulnerabilities in the security of our vehicles via our security vulnerability reporting policy, and we aim to remedy any reported and verified vulnerabilities. Accordingly, we have received reports of potential vulnerabilities in the past and have attempted to remedy them. However, there can be no assurance that vulnerabilities will not be identified in the future, or that our remediation efforts are or will be successful.

Any unauthorized access to or control of our vehicles or their systems or any loss of data could result in legal claims or proceedings. In addition, regardless of their veracity, reports of unauthorized access to our vehicles, their systems or data, as well as other factors that may result in the perception that our vehicles, their systems or data are capable of being 揾acked,?could negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

If we had a desire or need to raise additional funds and could not do so, our operations and prospects could be negatively affected

We expect that our principal sources of liquidity will provide us adequate liquidity based on our current plans. However, if the costs for developing, manufacturing and delivering our current or future vehicles exceed our expectations or if we incur any significant unplanned expenses or embark on or accelerate new significant strategic investments, such as the Gigafactory, we may need to raise additional funds. We need sufficient capital to fund our ongoing operations, continue research and development projects, including those for our planned Model 3 vehicle, establish sales and service centers, build and deploy Superchargers and to make the investments in tooling and manufacturing capital required to introduce new vehicles. If we cannot raise additional funds on favorable terms or at all when we need them, our financial condition, results of operations, business and prospects could be materially adversely affected.

We may face regulatory limitations on our ability to sell vehicles directly which could materially and adversely affect our ability to sell our electric vehicles.

We sell our vehicles from our Tesla stores as well as over the internet. We may not be able to sell our vehicles through this sales model in each state in the United States as some states have laws that may be interpreted to impose limitations on this sales model, including laws that prohibit manufacturers from selling vehicles directly to consumers without the use of an independent dealership or without a physical presence in the state. In certain states in which we are not able to obtain dealer licenses, we have worked with state regulators to open galleries, which are not full retail locations.

The application of these state laws to our operations continues to be difficult to predict. Laws in some states have limited our ability to obtain dealer licenses from state motor vehicle regulators and may continue to do so.

In addition, decisions by regulators permitting us to sell vehicles may be subject to challenges as to whether such decisions comply with applicable state motor vehicle industry laws. For example, vehicle dealer associations in New York, Ohio, Georgia and Massachusetts have filed lawsuits to revoke dealer licenses issued to us. These lawsuits have been dismissed, and in one court decision, the Supreme Court of Massachusetts held that state franchise laws like the one in Massachusetts do not restrict a manufacturer, like Tesla, that does not use franchised dealers from selling its vehicles directly to consumers. Such results have reinforced our continuing belief that state laws were not designed to prevent our distribution model. A similar lawsuit has been filed in Missouri. Possible additional challenges in other states, if successful, could restrict or prohibit our ability to sell our vehicles to residents in such states. In some states, there have also been regulatory and legislative efforts by vehicle dealer associations to propose bills and regulations that, if enacted, would prevent us from obtaining dealer licenses in their states given our current sales model. Other states, such as New Jersey, New York, Ohio and Pennsylvania, have passed legislation that clarifies our ability to operate, but at the same time limits the number of dealer licenses we can obtain or stores that we can operate.

Internationally, there may be laws in jurisdictions we have not yet entered or laws we are unaware of in jurisdictions we have entered that may restrict our sales or other business practices. Even for those jurisdictions we have analyzed, the laws in this area can be complex, difficult to interpret and may change over time.

23

We may need to defend ourselves against patent or trademark infringement claims, which may be time-consuming and would cause us to incur substantial costs.

Companies, organizations or individuals, including our competitors, may hold or obtain patents, trademarks or other proprietary rights that would prevent, limit or interfere with our ability to make, use, develop, sell or market our vehicles or components, which could make it more difficult for us to operate our business. From time to time, we may receive communications from holders of patents or trademarks regarding their proprietary rights. Companies holding patents or other intellectual property rights may bring suits alleging infringement of such rights or otherwise assert their rights and urge us to take licenses. In addition, if we are determined to have infringed upon a third party抯 intellectual property rights, we may be required to do one or more of the following:

 

?

cease selling, incorporating certain components into, or using vehicles or offering goods or services that incorporate or use the challenged intellectual property;

 

?

pay substantial damages;

 

?

seek a license from the holder of the infringed intellectual property right, which license may not be available on reasonable terms or at all;

 

?

redesign our vehicles or other goods or services; or

 

?

establish and maintain alternative branding for our products and services.

In the event of a successful claim of infringement against us and our failure or inability to obtain a license to the infringed technology or other intellectual property right, our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition could be materially adversely affected. In addition, any litigation or claims, whether or not valid, could result in substantial costs, negative publicity and diversion of resources and management attention.

Our patent applications may not result in issued patents, which may have a material adverse effect on our ability to prevent others from interfering with our commercialization of our products.

The status of patents involves complex legal and factual questions and the breadth and effectiveness of patented claims is uncertain. We cannot be certain that we are the first creator of inventions covered by pending patent applications or the first to file patent applications on these inventions, nor can we be certain that our pending patent applications will result in issued patents or that any of our issued patents will afford sufficient protection against someone creating a knockoff of our products, or as a defensive portfolio against a competitor who claims that we are infringing its patents. In addition, patent applications filed in foreign countries are subject to laws, rules and procedures that differ from those of the United States, and thus we cannot be certain that foreign patent applications will result in issued patents in those foreign jurisdictions or that such patents can be effectively enforced, even if they relate to patents issued in the U.S. In addition, others may obtain patents that we need to take a license to or design around, either of which would increase costs and may adversely affect our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Our trademark applications in certain countries remain subject to outstanding opposition proceedings.

We have filed trade and service mark applications for our Tesla marks in various countries in which we currently sell and plan to sell our products and services. Certain of our applications are subject to outstanding opposition proceedings brought by owners or applicants alleging prior applications for or use of similar marks, or refusals issued by trademark offices citing prior applications or registrations for allegedly similar marks. If we cannot resolve these oppositions and refusals and thereby secure registered rights in these countries, the value of the marks representing our exclusive brand name in these countries will be diluted. In addition, there is a risk that the prior rights owners could in the future take actions to challenge our use of the Tesla marks in these countries. Such actions could have a severe impact on our position in these countries and may inhibit our ability to use the Tesla marks in these countries. If we were prevented from using the Tesla marks in any or all of these countries, we would need to expend significant additional financial and marketing resources on establishing an alternative brand identity in these markets.

Our facilities or operations could be damaged or adversely affected as a result of disasters.

Our corporate headquarters and primary manufacturing facilities are all located in Northern California, a region known for seismic activity. If major disasters such as earthquakes or other events occur, or our information system or communications network breaks down or operates improperly, our headquarters and production facilities may be seriously damaged, or we may have to stop or delay production and shipment of our products. We may incur expenses relating to such damages, which could have a material adverse impact on our business, operating results and financial condition.

24

Servicing our indebtedness requires a significant amount of cash, and we may not have sufficient cash flow from our business to pay our substantial debt.

We have incurred $3.0 billion in aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes issued in registered public offerings. Under certain circumstances relating to the reported trading price of our common stock, the holders of our convertible senior notes may convert their notes at their option, upon which we would be obligated to deliver cash payments and/or shares of our common stock to the converting holders. Currently, holders of an aggregate $660.0 million tranche of notes have the right to convert their notes. Moreover, holders of the notes have the right to require us to repurchase their notes upon the occurrence of a fundamental change with respect to us. In addition, we have a senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility (the Credit Facility), under which we had $135 million of borrowings as of December 31, 2015.

Our ability to make scheduled payments of principal when due, to make periodic interest payments or to make other payments pursuant to the terms of our indebtedness, such as with respect to our convertible senior notes upon their conversion or upon demand following a fundamental change, depends on our future performance, which is subject to economic, financial, competitive and other factors beyond our control. Our business may not continue to generate cash flow from operations in the future sufficient to satisfy these obligations or obligations under any future indebtedness we may incur and to make necessary capital expenditures. If we are unable to generate such cash flow, we may be required to adopt one or more alternatives, such as reducing or delaying investments or capital expenditures, selling assets, refinancing or obtaining additional equity capital on terms that may be onerous or highly dilutive. Our ability to refinance our existing or any future indebtedness will depend on the capital markets and our financial condition at such time. In addition, our ability to make required payments under our indebtedness may be limited by law, by regulatory authority or by agreements governing our future indebtedness. We may not be able to engage in any of these activities or engage in these activities on desirable terms or at all, which could result in a default on our existing or future indebtedness. Furthermore, any repayment of any of our existing or future indebtedness prior to their scheduled maturity could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.

Our debt agreements contain covenant restrictions that may limit our ability to operate our business.

The terms of our Credit Facility contain, and any of our other future debt agreements may contain, covenant restrictions that limit our ability to operate our business, including restrictions on our ability to, among other things, incur additional debt or issue guarantees, create liens and make certain voluntary prepayments of specified debt. In addition, under certain circumstances we are required to comply with a fixed charge coverage ratio.

As a result of these covenants, our ability to respond to changes in business and economic conditions and to obtain additional financing, if needed, may be restricted, and we may be prevented from engaging in transactions that might otherwise be beneficial to us. In addition, our failure to comply with our debt covenants could result in a default under our debt agreements, which could permit the holders to accelerate our obligation to repay the debt. If any of our debt is accelerated, we may not have sufficient funds available to repay it.

We may still incur substantially more debt or take other actions, which would intensify the risks discussed immediately above.

We and our subsidiaries may, subject to the limitations in the terms of our Credit Facility, incur additional debt, secure existing or future debt, recapitalize our debt or take a number of other actions that are not limited by the terms of the indenture governing our convertible senior notes that could have the effect of diminishing our ability to make payments on the notes when due.

The classification of our convertible senior notes may have a material effect on our reported financial results.

As described in the Risk Factor 揝ervicing our indebtedness requires a significant amount of cash, and we may not have sufficient cash flow from our business to pay our substantial debt,?our convertible senior notes have been historically, and may become in the future, convertible at the option of their holders prior to their scheduled terms under certain circumstances. Even if holders do not elect to convert their notes, the notes become convertible prior to their scheduled maturity dates, we would be required to reclassify such notes and the related debt issuance costs as current liabilities and certain portions of our equity outside of equity to mezzanine equity, which would have an adverse impact on our reported financial results for such quarter, and could have an adverse impact on the market price of our common stock.

25

Risks Related to the Ownership of our Common Stock

The trading price of our common stock is likely to continue to be volatile.

The trading price of our common stock has been highly volatile and could continue to be subject to wide fluctuations in response to various factors, some of which are beyond our control. Our common stock has experienced an intra-day trading high of $286.65 per share and a low of $141.05 per share over the last 52 weeks. The stock market in general, and the market for technology companies in particular, has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations that have often been unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of those companies. Broad market and industry factors may seriously affect the market price of companies?stock, including ours, regardless of actual operating performance. In addition, in the past, following periods of volatility in the overall market and the market price of a particular company抯 securities, securities class action litigation has often been instituted against these companies. For example, a shareholder litigation like this was filed against us in 2013. While the trial court dismissed the plaintiffs?complaint with prejudice, this litigation (if the trial court抯 order is successfully appealed) or others like it could result in substantial costs and a diversion of our management抯 attention and resources.

Conversion of our convertible senior notes may dilute the ownership interest of existing stockholders, including holders who had previously converted their notes, or may otherwise depress the price of our common stock.

The conversion of some or all of our convertible senior notes will dilute the ownership interests of existing stockholders to the extent we deliver shares upon conversion of any of the notes. As described in the Risk Factor 揝ervicing our indebtedness requires a significant amount of cash, and we may not have sufficient cash flow from our business to pay our substantial debt,?our convertible senior notes have been historically, and may become in the future, convertible at the option of their holders prior to their scheduled terms under certain circumstances. Any sales in the public market of the common stock issuable upon such conversion could adversely affect prevailing market prices of our common stock. In addition, the existence of the notes may encourage short selling by market participants because the conversion of the notes could be used to satisfy short positions, or anticipated conversion of the notes into shares of our common stock could depress the price of our common stock.

The convertible note hedge and warrant transactions we entered into in connection with the issuance of our convertible senior notes may affect the value of the notes and our common stock.

In connection with each issuance of our convertible senior notes, we entered into convertible note hedge transactions with the hedge counterparties. The convertible note hedge transactions cover, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments, the number of shares of our common stock that initially underlay the applicable notes. The convertible note hedge transactions are expected to reduce the potential dilution and/or offset potential cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount upon conversion of the applicable notes. We also entered into warrant transactions with the hedge counterparties relating to the same number of shares of our common stock, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments. However, the warrant transactions could separately have a dilutive effect on our common stock to the extent that the market price per share of our common stock exceeds the applicable strike price of the warrants on the applicable expiration dates.

In addition, the hedge counterparties or their affiliates may modify their hedge positions by entering into or unwinding various derivatives with respect to our common stock and/or purchasing or selling our common stock or other securities of ours in secondary market transactions prior to the maturity of the applicable notes (and are likely to do so during any observation period related to a conversion of notes). This activity could also cause or prevent an increase or a decrease in the market price of our common stock or the notes.

We do not make any representation or prediction as to the direction or magnitude of any potential effect that the transactions described above may have on the prices of the notes or the shares of our common stock. In addition, we do not make any representation that the hedge counterparties have engaged or will engage in these transactions or that these transactions, once commenced, will not be discontinued without notice.

Mr. Musk borrowed funds from affiliates of certain underwriters in our public offerings and/or private placements and has pledged shares of our common stock to secure these borrowings. The forced sale of these shares pursuant to a margin call could cause our stock price to decline and negatively impact our business.

Beginning in June 2011, banking institutions that are affiliated with certain underwriters of our completed public offerings of common stock and our convertible senior notes made extensions of credit to Elon Musk and the Elon Musk Revocable Trust dated July 22, 2003, or the Trust, a portion of which Mr. Musk used to purchase shares of common stock in our public offerings in May 2013 and August 2015 and private placements in June 2011 and June 2013. We are not a party to these loans, which are full recourse against Mr. Musk and the Trust and are secured by pledges of a portion of the Tesla common stock currently owned by Mr. Musk and the Trust and other shares of capital stock of unrelated entities owned by Mr. Musk and the Trust.

26

If the price of our common stock declines, Mr. Musk may be forced by one or more of the banking institutions to provide additional collateral for the loans or to sell shares of Tesla common stock in order to remain within the margin limitations imposed under the terms of his loans. The loans between these banking institutions on the one hand, and Mr. Musk and the Trust on the other hand, prohibit the non-pledged shares currently owned by Mr. Musk and the Trust from being pledged to secure any other loans. These factors may limit Mr. Musk抯 ability to either pledge additional shares of Tesla common stock or sell shares of Tesla common stock as a means to avoid or satisfy a margin call with respect to his pledged Tesla common stock in the event of a decline in our stock price that is large enough to trigger a margin call. Any sales of common stock following a margin call that is not satisfied may cause the price of our common stock to decline further.

Anti-takeover provisions contained in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws, the provisions of Delaware law, and the terms of our convertible senior notes could impair a takeover attempt.

Our certificate of incorporation, bylaws, Delaware law and the terms of our convertible senior notes contain provisions which could have the effect of rendering more difficult, delaying or preventing an acquisition deemed undesirable by our board of directors. Our corporate governance documents include provisions:

 

?

creating a classified board of directors whose members serve staggered three-year terms;

 

?

authorizing 揵lank check?preferred stock, which could be issued by the board without stockholder approval and may contain voting, liquidation, dividend and other rights superior to our common stock;

 

?

limiting the liability of, and providing indemnification to, our directors and officers;

 

?

limiting the ability of our stockholders to call and bring business before special meetings;

 

?

requiring advance notice of stockholder proposals for business to be conducted at meetings of our stockholders and for nominations of candidates for election to our board of directors;

 

?

controlling the procedures for the conduct and scheduling of board and stockholder meetings; and

 

?

providing the board of directors with the express power to postpone previously scheduled annual meetings and to cancel previously scheduled special meetings.

As a Delaware corporation, we are also subject to provisions of Delaware law, including Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation law, which prevents some stockholders holding more than 15% of our outstanding common stock from engaging in certain business combinations without approval of the holders of substantially all of our outstanding common stock.

Any provision of our certificate of incorporation or bylaws or Delaware law that has the effect of delaying or deterring a change in control could limit the opportunity for our stockholders to receive a premium for their shares of our common stock, and could also affect the price that some investors are willing to pay for our common stock.

In addition, the terms of the convertible senior notes require us to repurchase the notes in the event of a fundamental change. A takeover of our company would trigger an option of the holders of the notes to require us to repurchase the notes. This may have the effect of delaying or preventing a takeover of our company that would otherwise be beneficial to our stockholders.

 

 

ITEM 1B.

UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS

None.3.D RISK FACTORS

Industry and Business Risks

The worldwide automotive market is highly competitive.

The worldwide automotive market is highly competitive. Toyota faces intense competition from automotive manufacturers in the markets in which it operates. Although the global economy continues to recover gradually, competition in the automotive industry has further intensified amidst difficult overall market conditions. In addition, competition is likely to further intensify in light of further continuing globalization in the worldwide automotive industry, possibly resulting in industry reorganizations. Factors affecting competition include product quality and features, safety, reliability, fuel economy, the amount of time required for innovation and development, pricing, customer service and financing terms. Increased competition may lead to lower vehicle unit sales, which may result in a further downward price pressure and adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. Toyota’s ability to adequately respond to the recent rapid changes in the automotive market and to maintain its competitiveness will be fundamental to its future success in existing and new markets and to maintain its market share. There can be no assurances that Toyota will be able to compete successfully in the future.

The worldwide automotive industry is highly volatile.

Each of the markets in which Toyota competes has been subject to considerable volatility in demand. Demand for vehicles depends to a large extent on economic, social and political conditions in a given market and the introduction of new vehicles and technologies. As Toyota’s revenues are derived from sales in markets worldwide, economic conditions in such markets are particularly important to Toyota. In fiscal 2015, the Japanese economy continued on a path of moderate recovery, even though weakness could be seen in personal consumption and other areas. The U.S. economy saw ongoing recovery mainly due to increasing personal consumption and the European economy as a whole showed continuing signs of recovery. Meanwhile, economies such as those of China and emerging countries showed signs of weakness. The shifts in demand for automobiles are continuing, and it is unclear how this situation will transition in the future. Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected if the shifts in demand for automobiles continues or progresses further. Demand may also be affected by factors directly impacting vehicle price or the cost of purchasing and operating vehicles such as sales and financing incentives, prices of raw materials and parts and components, cost of fuel and governmental regulations (including tariffs, import regulation and other taxes). Volatility in demand may lead to lower vehicle unit sales, which may result in downward price pressure and adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s future success depends on its ability to offer new, innovative and competitively priced products that meet customer demand on a timely basis.

Meeting customer demand by introducing attractive new vehicles and reducing the amount of time required for product development are critical to automotive manufacturers. In particular, it is critical to meet customer demand with respect to quality, safety and reliability. The timely introduction of new vehicle models, at competitive prices, meeting rapidly changing customer preferences and demand is more fundamental to Toyota’s success than ever, as the automotive market is rapidly transforming in light of the changing global economy. There is no assurance, however, that Toyota will adequately and appropriately respond to changing customer preferences and demand with respect to quality, safety, reliability, styling and other features in a timely manner. Even if Toyota succeeds in perceiving customer preferences and demand, there is no assurance that Toyota will be capable of developing and manufacturing new, price competitive products in a timely manner with its available technology, intellectual property, sources of raw materials and parts and components, and production capacity, including cost reduction capacity. Further, there is no assurance that Toyota will be able to implement capital expenditures at the level and times planned by management. Toyota’s inability to develop and offer products that meet customers’ preferences and demand with respect to quality, safety, reliability, styling and other features in a timely manner could result in a lower market share and reduced sales volumes and margins, and may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

 

5

Table of Contents
Toyota’s ability to market and distribute effectively is an integral part of Toyota’s successful sales.

Toyota’s success in the sale of vehicles depends on its ability to market and distribute effectively based on distribution networks and sales techniques tailored to the needs of its customers. There is no assurance that Toyota will be able to develop sales techniques and distribution networks that effectively adapt to changing customer preferences or changes in the regulatory environment in the major markets in which it operates. Toyota’s inability to maintain well-developed sales techniques and distribution networks may result in decreased sales and market share and may adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s success is significantly impacted by its ability to maintain and develop its brand image.

In the highly competitive automotive industry, it is critical to maintain and develop a brand image. In order to maintain and develop a brand image, it is necessary to further increase customers’ confidence by providing safe, high-quality products that meet customer preferences and demand. If Toyota is unable to effectively maintain and develop its brand image as a result of its inability to provide safe, high-quality products or as a result of the failure to promptly implement safety measures such as recalls when necessary, vehicle unit sales and/or sale prices may decrease, and as a result revenues and profits may not increase as expected or may decrease, adversely affecting its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota relies on suppliers for the provision of certain supplies including parts, components and raw materials.

Toyota purchases supplies including parts, components and raw materials from a number of external suppliers located around the world. For some supplies, Toyota relies on a single supplier or a limited number of suppliers, whose replacement with another supplier may be difficult. Inability to obtain supplies from a single or limited source supplier may result in difficulty obtaining supplies and may restrict Toyota’s ability to produce vehicles. Furthermore, even if Toyota were to rely on a large number of suppliers, first-tier suppliers with whom Toyota directly transacts may in turn rely on a single second-tier supplier or limited second-tier suppliers. Toyota’s ability to continue to obtain supplies from its suppliers in a timely and cost-effective manner is subject to a number of factors, some of which are not within Toyota’s control. These factors include the ability of Toyota’s suppliers to provide a continued source of supply, and Toyota’s ability to effectively compete and obtain competitive prices from suppliers. A loss of any single or limited source supplier or inability to obtain supplies from suppliers in a timely and cost-effective manner could lead to increased costs or delays or suspensions in Toyota’s production and deliveries, which could have an adverse effect on Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

The worldwide financial services industry is highly competitive.

The worldwide financial services industry is highly competitive. Increased competition in automobile financing may lead to decreased margins. A decline in Toyota’s vehicle unit sales, an increase in residual value risk due to lower used vehicle price, an increase in the ratio of credit losses and increased funding costs are factors which may impact Toyota’s financial services operations. If Toyota is unable to adequately respond to the changes and competition in automobile financing, Toyota’s financial services operations may adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s operations and vehicles rely on various digital and information technologies.

Toyota depends on various information technology networks and systems, some of which are managed by third parties, to process, transmit and store electronic information, including sensitive data, and to manage or support a variety of business processes and activities, including manufacturing, research and development, supply chain management, sales and accounting. In addition, Toyota’s vehicles may rely on various digital and information technologies, including information service and driving assistance functions. Despite security measures, Toyota’s digital and information technology networks and systems may be vulnerable to damage, disruptions or shutdowns due to attacks by hackers, computer viruses, breaches due to unauthorized use, errors or

 

6

Table of Contents
malfeasance by employees and others who have or gain access to the networks and systems Toyota depends on, service failures or bankruptcy of third parties such as software development or cloud computing vendors, power shortages and outages, and utility failures or other catastrophic events like natural disasters. Such incidents could materially disrupt critical operations, disclose sensitive data, interfere with information services and driving assistance functions in Toyota’s vehicles, and/or give rise to legal claims or proceedings, liability or regulatory penalties under applicable laws, which could have an adverse effect on Toyota’s brand image and its financial condition and results of operations.

Financial Market and Economic Risks

Toyota’s operations are subject to currency and interest rate fluctuations.

Toyota is sensitive to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and is principally exposed to fluctuations in the value of the Japanese yen, the U.S. dollar and the euro and, to a lesser extent, the Australian dollar, the Russian ruble, the Canadian dollar and the British pound. Toyota’s consolidated financial statements, which are presented in Japanese yen, are affected by foreign currency exchange fluctuations through translation risk, and changes in foreign currency exchange rates may also affect the price of products sold and materials purchased by Toyota in foreign currencies through transaction risk. In particular, strengthening of the Japanese yen against the U.S. dollar can have an adverse effect on Toyota’s operating results.

Toyota believes that its use of certain derivative financial instruments including foreign exchange forward contracts and interest rate swaps and increased localized production of its products have reduced, but not eliminated, the effects of interest rate and foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. Nonetheless, a negative impact resulting from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and changes in interest rates may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. For a further discussion of currency and interest rate fluctuations and the use of derivative financial instruments, see “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects — Operating Results — Overview — Currency Fluctuations”, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk”, and notes 20 and 21 to Toyota’s consolidated financial statements.

High prices of raw materials and strong pressure on Toyota’s suppliers could negatively impact Toyota’s profitability.

Increases in prices for raw materials that Toyota and Toyota’s suppliers use in manufacturing their products or parts and components such as steel, precious metals, non-ferrous alloys including aluminum, and plastic parts, may lead to higher production costs for parts and components. This could, in turn, negatively impact Toyota’s future profitability because Toyota may not be able to pass all those costs on to its customers or require its suppliers to absorb such costs.

A downturn in the financial markets could adversely affect Toyota’s ability to raise capital.

Should the world economy suddenly deteriorate, a number of financial institutions and investors will face difficulties in providing capital to the financial markets at levels corresponding to their own financial capacity, and, as a result, there is a risk that companies may not be able to raise capital under terms that they would expect to receive with their creditworthiness. If Toyota is unable to raise the necessary capital under appropriate conditions on a timely basis, Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected.

Political, Regulatory, Legal and Other Risks

The automotive industry is subject to various governmental regulations.

The worldwide automotive industry is subject to various laws and governmental regulations including those related to vehicle safety and environmental matters such as emission levels, fuel economy, noise and pollution. In particular, automotive manufacturers such as Toyota are required to implement safety measures such as recalls

 

7

Table of Contents
for vehicles that do not or may not comply with the safety standards of laws and governmental regulations. In addition, Toyota may, in order to reassure its customers of the safety of Toyota’s vehicles, decide to voluntarily implement recalls or other safety measures even if the vehicle complies with the safety standards of relevant laws and governmental regulations. Many governments also impose tariffs and other trade barriers, taxes and levies, or enact price or exchange controls. Toyota has incurred, and expects to incur in the future, significant costs in complying with these regulations. If Toyota launches products that result in safety measures such as recalls, Toyota may incur various costs including significant costs for free repairs. Furthermore, new legislation or changes in existing legislation may also subject Toyota to additional expenses in the future. If Toyota incurs significant costs related to implementing safety measures or meeting laws and governmental regulations, Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected.

Toyota may become subject to various legal proceedings.

As an automotive manufacturer, Toyota may become subject to legal proceedings in respect of various issues, including product liability and infringement of intellectual property. Toyota may also be subject to legal proceedings brought by its shareholders and governmental proceedings and investigations. Toyota is in fact currently subject to a number of pending legal proceedings and government investigations. A negative outcome in one or more of these pending legal proceedings could adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. For a further discussion of governmental regulations, see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Governmental Regulation, Environmental and Safety Standards” and for legal proceedings, please see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Legal Proceedings”.

Toyota may be adversely affected by natural calamities, political and economic instability, fuel shortages or interruptions in social infrastructure, wars, terrorism and labor strikes.

Toyota is subject to various risks associated with conducting business worldwide. These risks include natural calamities; political and economic instability; fuel shortages; interruption in social infrastructure including energy supply, transportation systems, gas, water, or communication systems resulting from natural hazards or technological hazards; wars; terrorism; labor strikes and work stoppages. Should the major markets in which Toyota purchases materials, parts and components and supplies for the manufacture of Toyota products or in which Toyota’s products are produced, distributed or sold be affected by any of these events, it may result in disruptions and delays in the operations of Toyota’s business. Should significant or prolonged disruptions or delays related to Toyota’s business operations occur, it may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.The Worldwide Automotive Market

Toyota estimates that annual worldwide vehicle sales totaled approximately 89 million units in 2014.

Automobile sales are affected by a number of factors including:

 

 	•	 	
social, political and economic conditions;

 

 	•	 	
introduction of new vehicles and technologies; and

 

 	•	 	
costs incurred by customers to purchase and operate automobiles.

 

9

Table of Contents
These factors can cause consumer demand to vary substantially from year to year in different geographic markets and in individual categories of automobiles.

In fiscal 2015, the global economy experienced gradual expansion in developed countries with the United States as a driving force, while growth in emerging markets slowed down due to the relative weakening currencies of emerging markets reflecting in part the end of U.S. monetary quantitative easing contributing to the strength of the U.S. dollar, as well as due to the decline in prices of natural resources in resource-producing countries contributing to the weakness of the local currency of such countries.

The automotive industry was also impacted by this trend. In 2014, with respect to developed countries, markets in the United States expanded and the downturn bottomed out in Europe. In addition, in Japan, due to the consumption tax increase in April 2014, market demand slowed down. In emerging markets, the expansion of the Chinese market continued despite signs of weakness in the economy, but markets in other emerging countries slowed down.

However, in the medium- to long-term, Toyota expects the automotive market to grow driven principally by the growth in emerging markets. Global competition is expected to be severe, as competition in compact and low-price vehicles intensifies, and technological development and development of new products become more frequent with a heightened global awareness of the environment and more stringent fuel economy standards.

In 2014, China, North America, Europe and Asia were the world’s largest automotive markets. The share of each market across the globe, which Toyota estimates based on the available automobile sales data in each country and region information, was 27% for China, 22% for North America (20% excluding Mexico and Puerto Rico), 21% for Europe and 10% for Asia. In China, new vehicle sales increased to approximately 24.0 million units. In North America, new vehicle sales increased to approximately 19.6 million units. In Europe, new vehicle sales increased to approximately 18.4 million units. In Asia (including India but excluding Japan and China), new vehicle unit sales decreased slightly from the previous year to approximately 8.8 million units.

The worldwide automotive industry is affected significantly by government regulations aimed at reducing harmful effects on the environment, enhancing vehicle safety and improving fuel economy. These regulations have added to the cost of manufacturing vehicles. Many governments also mandate local procurement of parts and components and impose tariffs and other trade barriers and price or exchange controls as a means of creating jobs, protecting domestic producers or influencing their balance of payments. Changes in regulatory requirements and other government-imposed restrictions can limit an automaker’s operations. These regulations can also make it difficult to repatriate profits to an automaker’s home country.

The development of the worldwide automotive market includes the continuing globalization of automotive operations. Manufacturers seek to achieve globalization by localizing the design and manufacture of automobiles and their parts and components in the markets in which they are sold. By expanding production capabilities beyond their home markets, automotive manufacturers are able to reduce their exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates as well as to trade restrictions and tariffs.

Recently, there have been many global business alliances and investments entered into between manufacturers in the global automotive industry. There are various reasons behind these transactions including the need to respond to the excessive global capacity in the production of automobiles, the need to reduce costs and improve efficiency by increasing the number of automobiles produced using common vehicle platforms and by sharing research and development expenses for environmental and other technology, the desire to expand a company’s global presence through increased size and the desire to expand into particular segments or geographic markets.

Toyota believes that its research and development initiatives, particularly the development of environmentally friendly new vehicle technologies, vehicle safety and information technology, provide it with a strategic advantage.

 

10

Table of Contents
Toyota’s ability to compete in the global automotive industry will depend in part on Toyota’s successful implementation of its business strategy. This is subject to a number of factors, some of which are not in Toyota’s control. These factors are discussed in “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects” and elsewhere in this annual report.

Toyota Global Vision

In March 2011, Toyota unveiled its “Toyota Global Vision” corporate outline for the future, which serves not only to give direction to Toyota employees around the world, but also to convey such direction to customers and to the public at large. Toyota will work to achieve sustained growth through the realization of the following ideals which are parts of the Vision:

“The safest and most responsible ways of moving people”

 

 	•	 	
Safety is Toyota’s highest priority, and Toyota will continue to provide world-class safety.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will also continue to contribute to environmental quality and to human happiness by using leading environmental technology and by deploying that technology in a growing line of vehicle models. At the same time, Toyota will work through the provision of products, sales and services that exceed customer expectation to offer a rewarding experience for customers.

“Enriching lives around the world”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota has been consistently true to its founding spirit of serving society through conscientious manufacturing, and it will continue working in that spirit to contribute to enhance the quality of life wherever it has operations.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will strive to continue contributing to economic vitality wherever it has operations by generating stable employment and by participating in mutually beneficial business relationships with dealers and suppliers. It will also strive to continue to actively engage in initiatives for human resources development and the promotion of cultural activities of its host communities.

“Lead the way to the future of mobility”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will lead the industry in technological development that will spawn next-generation mobility. For example, it will explore possibilities in personal mobility and in the convergence of information technology for automobiles and “smart grids” for optimizing energy generation and consumption. Toyota will strive to offer products and services that match the needs in each market.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will strive to advance environmental technology and develop low-carbon technologies and technologies for maximizing safety through interaction with the transport infrastructure to lay a foundation for sustainable and amenable future mobility.

“Our commitment to quality, constant innovation”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota is committed to providing quality vehicles that are highly reliable and driven with a sense of safety and reliability.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will constantly reinvent itself and continue to engage in cutting-edge technology development. Toyota will work towards offering vehicles around the world that address the needs of today and of tomorrow at affordable prices.

“Continued awareness for the Earth and environment”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will continue to work towards minimizing environmental impact in its manufacturing and other operations, and products.

 

11

Table of Contents
 	•	 	
With an emphasis on environmental awareness, Toyota will in its operations work towards energy conservation, reduction in carbon dioxide emission, efficient use of resources such as recycling, and human resource development and production methods that allow for coexistence with nature.

“Exceed expectations and be rewarded with a smile”

 

 	•	 	
Everyone at Toyota will continuously maintain a sense of gratitude to customers and will strive to earn smiles with products and services that are stimulating and inspiring and exceed customer expectations.

“There is always a better way”

 

 	•	 	
All Toyota employees will share the recognition that there is always a better way and share a commitment to continuous improvement, which are fundamental to The Toyota Way.

“Meet challenging goals by engaging the talent and passion of people”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will nurture a corporate culture where teamwork and individual creativity thrive and where people will approach their work with pride and passion.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will honor the spirit of diversity in recruiting, training and promoting capable individuals around the world. Human resources development at Toyota will continue to promote the transfer of the company’s monozukuri spirit of conscientious manufacturing and related skills and know-how from one generation to the next.

As for Toyota’s future business environment, in the world economy, the U.S. is expected to recover steadily. Also the European economy is picking up gradually chiefly in the eurozone, while the economies of several countries are likely to slow down, such as in Russia which is weighed down by declines in crude oil prices. Emerging countries also show downside risk. The Japanese economy is expected to recover gradually through improvements in employment and income conditions, although attention needs to be paid to such factors as uncertainty in overseas economies, which performance will affect the Japanese economy.

The automotive market is expected to expand gradually, led by the U.S. However, amid adaptation of eco-car promotion policies in various countries and increased efforts toward the development of safety technologies, as well as continuing advances in information and communication technology, fierce competition exists on a global scale.

In this severe business environment, Toyota intends to steadily progress toward the realization of the Toyota Global Vision through sustainable growth based on the following policies:

First, Toyota intends to reinforce its core competitiveness in order to grow as steadily as a tree adding annual growth rings. It plans to work on quality improvement and human resource development in order to manufacture vehicles that bring smiles to customers. In addition, it plans to thoroughly improve productivity in each of its business operations through measures such as effective use of management resources and the strengthening of its IT infrastructure.

Second, Toyota intends to take on bold challenges toward the creation of new value in order to progress into the future. It plans to work toward the future of mobility through pioneering technologies, products and businesses.

In order to implement the above, Toyota intends to improve its management structure to speed up decision-making, enhance the supervision of business execution, strengthen collaboration with Toyota group companies and leverage the value of diversity.

Based on these initiatives, Toyota will contribute to “enriching lives of communities” by providing “ever-better cars.” This is expected to encourage more customers to purchase Toyota cars and thereby lead to the

 

12

Table of Contents
establishment of a stable business base. By perpetuating this cycle, it will aim to realize sustainable growth and enhance corporate value. In addition, through full observance of corporate ethics such as compliance with applicable laws and regulations, Toyota will fulfill its social responsibilities.

Automotive Operations

Toyota’s revenues from its automotive operations were ¥25,062.1 billion in fiscal 2015, ¥23,781.4 billion in fiscal 2014 and ¥20,419.1 billion in fiscal 2013.

Toyota produces and sells passenger cars, minivans and commercial vehicles such as trucks. Toyota Motor Corporation’s subsidiary, Daihatsu Motor Co., Ltd. (“Daihatsu”), produces and sells mini-vehicles and compact cars. Hino Motors, Ltd. (“Hino”), also a subsidiary of Toyota Motor Corporation, produces and sells commercial vehicles such as trucks and buses. Toyota also manufactures automotive parts, components and accessories for its own use and for sale to others.

On March 4, 2015, Toyota Motor Corporation, Toyota Motor Sales & Marketing Corporation (“TMSM”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Toyota Motor Corporation, and Toyota Marketing Japan Corporation (“TMJ”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of TMSM, announced that TMSM will merge with and into Toyota Motor Corporation and TMJ’s motor sports business will be transferred to Toyota Motor Corporation.

Vehicle Models

Toyota’s vehicles (produced by Toyota, Daihatsu and Hino) can be classified into three categories: hybrid vehicles, conventional engine vehicles, and fuel cell vehicles, which in December 2014 became available commercially for the first time in the world, in the Japanese market. Toyota’s product line-up includes subcompact and compact cars, mini-vehicles, mid-size, luxury, sports and specialty cars, recreational and sport-utility vehicles, pickup trucks, minivans, trucks and buses.

Hybrid Vehicles

The world’s first mass-produced hybrid car was Toyota’s Prius. It runs on an efficient combination of a gasoline engine and motor. This system allows the Prius to travel more efficiently than conventional engine vehicles of comparable size and performance. The hybrid design of the Prius also results in the output of 75% less emission than the maximum amount allowed by Japanese environmental regulations. Toyota views the Prius as the cornerstone of its emphasis on designing and producing eco-friendly automobiles.

In the last three years, Toyota has strengthened its hybrid lineup by introducing the Prius plug-in and the fully remodeled GS450h in January 2012, the Yaris HV in May 2012, the ES300h in July 2012, the Auris HV in November 2012, the Avalon HV and the fully remodeled Crown HV in December 2012, the fully remodeled IS300h in May 2013, the fully remodeled Corolla Axio HV/Corolla Fielder HV in August 2013, the fully remodeled Harrier HV in December 2013, the fully remodeled Voxy HV/Noah HV in January 2014, the NX300h in July 2014, the RC300h and the Esquire HV in September 2014 and the fully remodeled Alphard and Vellfire in January 2015. In the hybrid vehicles area, where strong growth is anticipated, Toyota aims to continue its efforts to offer a diverse line-up of hybrid vehicles, enhance engine power while improving fuel economy and otherwise work towards increasing the sales of hybrid vehicles.

Fuel Cell Vehicles

Toyota began limited sales of a fuel cell vehicle in Japan and the United States in December 2002. In June 2005, Toyota’s new fuel cell passenger vehicle became the first in Japan to acquire vehicle type certification under the Road Vehicles Act, as amended, on March 31, 2005, by Japan’s Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. Leases for fuel cell vehicles began in July 2005. By 2007, Toyota was able to make

 

13

Table of Contents
improvements to start-up and cruising distance at temperatures below freezing, which were technological challenges. Toyota has made advances by solving technological issues such as the above and worked towards the practical use of such solutions, culminating in the general sale of the world’s first mass produced fuel cell vehicle MIRAI in Japan beginning in December 2014.

Conventional Engine Vehicles

Subcompact and Compact

Toyota’s subcompact and compact cars include the four-door Corolla sedan, which is one of Toyota’s bestselling models. The Yaris, marketed as the Vitz in Japan, is a subcompact car designed to perform better and offer greater comfort than other compact cars available in the market with low emissions that are particularly attractive to European consumers. In Europe, Toyota introduced the fully remodeled Aygo in June 2014. In Japan, Toyota introduced the remodeled Corolla Axio/Fielder in May 2012, the remodeled Porte and its variant, the Spade, in July 2012 and the remodeled Auris in August 2012. In India, Asia, China and other markets, Toyota introduced the Etios and Vios. In addition, Toyota introduced the AGYA, which is designed and manufactured by Daihatsu.

Mini-Vehicles

Mini-vehicles are manufactured and sold by Daihatsu. Daihatsu manufactures mini-vehicles, passenger vehicles, commercial vehicles and auto parts. Mini-vehicles are passenger cars, vans or trucks with engine displacements of 660 cubic centimeters or less. Daihatsu sold approximately 629 thousand mini-vehicles and 197 thousand automobiles on a consolidated basis during fiscal 2015. Daihatsu’s largest market is Japan, which accounted for approximately 80% of Daihatsu’s unit sales during fiscal 2015. From 2011, Toyota began to sell some mini-vehicles manufactured by Daihatsu under the Toyota brand.

Mid-Size

Toyota’s mid-size models include the Camry, which has been the bestselling passenger car in the United States for seventeen of the past eighteen calendar years (from 1997 to present) and also for the last thirteen consecutive years. The Camry was fully remodeled in August 2011. Camry sales in the United States for 2014 were approximately 428 thousand units (including Camry hybrids). In addition, Toyota’s other mid-size models include the REIZ for the Chinese market, the Avensis, which was remodeled in November 2008 for the European market, and the Mark X, which was remodeled in October 2009 for the Japanese market.

Luxury & Large

In North America, Europe, Japan and other regions, Toyota’s luxury lineup consists primarily of vehicles sold under the Lexus brand name. Lexus passenger car models include the LS, the GS, the ES, the IS, the HS, the CT and the RC. Lexus models also include the LX, the GX, the RX and the NX sold as luxury sport-utility vehicles. Toyota commenced sales of its luxury automobiles in Japan under the Lexus brand in August 2005. As of March 31, 2015, the Lexus brand lineup in Japan includes the LS, the GS, the HS, the IS, the CT, the RX, the NX and the RC. The Toyota brand’s full-size luxury car, the Avalon, was remodeled in October 2012, and the Crown was remodeled in December 2012. Toyota also sells the Century limousine in Japan.

Sports and Specialty

In the United States Toyota sells the Scion tC, a sports model targeted at young drivers. In December 2010, Toyota introduced the LFA model under the Lexus brand as the high-performance sports model, and in April 2012, Toyota introduced the 86 (called Scion FR-S in the U.S.), a compact sports car with a front-mounted engine and rear-wheel drive. In October 2014, Toyota introduced the RC coupe that leads the image of Lexus, which engages drivers on a sentimental level.

 

14

Table of Contents
Recreational and Sport-Utility Vehicles and Pickup Trucks

Toyota sells a variety of sport-utility vehicles and pickup trucks. Toyota’s sport-utility vehicles available in North America include the Sequoia, the 4Runner, the RAV4, the Highlander, the FJ Cruiser and the Land Cruiser, and pickup trucks available are the Tacoma and Tundra. The Tacoma, the Tundra, the Highlander and the Sequoia are manufactured in the United States. Toyota also offers four types of sport-utility vehicles under the Lexus brand, including the LX, the GX, the RX, and the NX. Toyota also manufactures the RX and RAV4 models in Canada. Toyota’s pickup truck, the Hilux, has been the bestselling model of all Toyota cars sold in Thailand. In North America, the fully remodeled RAV4 was introduced in December 2012 and the fully remodeled Highlander was introduced in December 2013. In July 2014, Toyota introduced the new NX model under the Lexus brand, and in May 2015, Toyota introduced the fully remodeled Hilux in Thailand.

Minivans and Cabwagons

Toyota offers several basic models for the global minivan market. Its largest minivans in Japan, the Alphard and the Vellfire, were remodeled in January 2015. In addition, the Corolla Verso was remodeled in December 2008 in Europe, and the Wish was remodeled in April 2009, the Noah/Voxy was remodeled in January 2014 and the new model Esquire was introduced in October 2014 in Japan. Toyota’s other minivan models include, in Japan, the Estima, the Sienta and the Isis, and, in North America, the Sienna.

Trucks and Buses

Toyota’s product lineup includes trucks (including vans) up to a gross vehicle weight of five tons and micro-buses that are sold in Japan and in overseas markets. Trucks and buses are also manufactured and sold by Hino, a subsidiary of Toyota. Hino’s product lineup includes large trucks with a gross vehicle weight of over eleven tons, medium trucks with a gross vehicle weight of between five and eleven tons and small trucks with a gross vehicle weight of up to five tons. Hino’s bus lineup includes medium to large buses used primarily as tour buses and public buses, small buses and micro-buses.5.C RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT, PATENTS AND LICENSES

Toyota’s research and development is dedicated to capturing the increasingly diverse and sophisticated market through the development of attractive, affordable, high-quality products for customers worldwide. The intellectual property that R&D generates is a vital management resource that Toyota utilizes and protects to maximize its corporate value. For a more detailed discussion of the company’s research and development objectives and policies, see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Research and Development”.

Toyota’s research and development expenditures were approximately ¥1,004.5 billion in fiscal 2015, ¥910.5 billion in fiscal 2014 and ¥807.4 billion in fiscal 2013.

Toyota operates a global research and development organization with the primary goal of building automobiles that meet the needs of customers in every region of the world. In Japan, research and development operations are led by Toyota and Toyota Central Research & Development Laboratories, Inc., which works closely with Daihatsu Motor Co., Ltd., Hino Motors, Ltd., Toyota Auto Body Co., Ltd., Toyota Motor East Japan, Inc., and many other Toyota group companies. Overseas, Toyota has a worldwide network of technical centers as well as design and motorsports research and development centers.

 

87

Table of Contents
The following table provides information on Toyota’s principal research and development facilities.

 

Facility

  	
Principal Activity

Japan	  	
Toyota Technical Center

  	Product planning, style, design and evaluation
Higashi-Fuji Technical Center

  	Advanced research and development
Tokyo Design Research & Laboratory

  	Research of advanced styling designs
Shibetsu Proving Ground

  	Vehicle testing and evaluation
Toyota Central R&D Labs., Inc.

  	Basic research
United States

  	
Toyota Motor Engineering and Manufacturing North America, Inc.

  	North American production and product planning, upper body planning, evaluation
Calty Design Research, Inc.

  	Design
Toyota Research Institute of North America (TRI-NA)

  	Advanced research relating to “energy and environment”, “safety” and “mobility infrastructure”
Europe

  	
Toyota Motor Europe NV/SA

  	Upper body planning for European production, evaluation and advanced research
Toyota Europe Design Development S.A.R.L.

  	Design
Toyota Motorsport GmbH

  	Development of motor sports vehicles
Asia Pacific

  	
Toyota Motor Asia Pacific Engineering and Manufacturing Co., Ltd.

  	Production, planning and evaluation of vehicles that are produced in Australia and Asia
Toyota Technical Center Asia Pacific Australia Pty, Ltd.

  	Production, planning and evaluation of vehicles that are produced in Australia and Asia
China

  	
Toyota Motor Engineering and Manufacturing (China) Co., Ltd.

  	Research of new, low-energy vehicle technology, vehicle evaluation and quality assurance in China
FAW Toyota Research & Development Co., Ltd

  	Design and evaluation of vehicles manufactured in China
GAC Toyota Motor Co., Ltd. R&D Center

  	Design and evaluation of vehicles manufactured in China
Toyota decided to reorganize its subsidiary and vehicle development partner Toyota Technical Development Corporation, integrating its vehicle development functions into Toyota from January 2016.

Toyota carefully analyzes patents and the need for patents in each area of research to formulate more effective research and development strategies. Toyota identifies research and development projects in which it should acquire patents, and files relevant applications as necessary to help build a strong global patent portfolio.

In addition, Toyota wishes to contribute to sustainable mobility by promoting the spread of technologies with environmental and safety benefits. This is why Toyota takes an open stance to patent licensing and grants licenses when appropriate terms are met. For example, in March 2004, Toyota and Ford Motor Company entered

 

88

Table of Contents
into licensing agreements for patents related to hybrid systems and emissions purification. In addition, in March 2010, Toyota and Mazda Motor Corporation entered into a licensing agreement regarding the supply of hybrid system technology.

Toyota does not consider any one group of patents or licenses to be so important that their expiration or termination would materially affect Toyota’s business. For a further discussion of Toyota’s intellectual property, see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Intellectual Property”.