With the future program TOGETHER – Strategy 2025
announced in 2016, we aim to make the Volkswagen Group
more focused, efficient, innovative, customer-oriented and
sustainable, and systematically geared towards generating
profitable growth. The program creates the framework and
lays the cornerstones for us to achieve our vision of being
one of the world’s leading providers of sustainable mobility.
The time horizon until 2025 shows that our thoughts
and actions are long-term and future-oriented. The term
TOGETHER describes the mindset that will be even more vital
to the Volkswagen Group’s long-term success going forward.
Our intention with the new Group strategy is for everyone in
the Volkswagen Group to join us in producing exciting vehicles and forward-looking, tailor-made mobility solutions that
will continue to inspire our customers, meeting their diverse
needs with a portfolio of strong brands. Every day, we actively
assume and exercise responsibility in relation to the environment, safety and society, and we wish to be a role model in
these areas. Integrity, reliability, quality and passion thus
form the basis for our work. In this way, we will aim for
technological leadership in the industry, ensure our competitive profitability and remain an excellent, reliable and
secure employer at the same time.
The Code of Collaboration formulated as part of the
future program is the foundation on which the Group
strategy rests. This Code describes how collaboration is to
take place within the Group and between individuals in their
day-to-day work. Its core values are encapsulated in the terms
“genuine”, “straightforward”, “open-minded”, “as equals” and
“united”.
Goals and Strategies
We are striving for lasting success in tomorrow’s world of mobility and intend to be one of the
world’s leading providers of sustainable mobility. This is the reason we have anchored the
future program TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 in the Group.
FUTURE PROGRAM TOGETHER – STRATEGY 2025
Sustainable
growth
Excellent
employer Competitive
protability
Role model for
environment, safety
and integrity
Excited
customers
52 Goals and Strategies Group Management Report
FOUR BUILDING BLOCKS OF THE FUTURE PROGRAM
TOGETHER – STRATEGY 2025
Our Group strategy comprises a raft of far-reaching strategic
decisions and specific initiatives aimed at safeguarding the
long-term future and generating profitable growth. It is
composed of four building blocks which cover strategic
Group initiatives. We regularly review the progress of these
initiatives so as to analyze the significance, suitability and
target achievement of the measures defined. We are thus able
to adjust the Group initiatives specifically according to the
dynamic changes occurring within our Company.
The first of these is the transformation of the core automotive business. Developing, building and selling vehicles
will remain essential for the Volkswagen Group going forward. However, there will be far-reaching and lasting changes
to this business in the future. That is the reason why we are
comprehensively restructuring our core business to face this
new era of mobility.
The second key building block in our Group strategy is
establishing a new mobility solutions business. In this business, we are developing innovative and efficient, attractive
yet profitable mobility services that are tailored to customer
requirements with the goal of being one of the leading
providers in this growth market in the future.
With the third key building block, we are intensifying our
traditionally excellent innovative strength and placing it on
an even broader footing. This is necessary both for the transformation of our core business and for the establishment
of the new mobility solutions business. To this end, we are
pushing ahead with the digital transformation in all parts of
the Company.
Becoming one of the world’s leading providers of sustainable mobility calls for substantial capital expenditure.
This will be financed in particular through efficiency gains
along the entire value chain – from product development and
procurement through to production and distribution as well
as in the central supporting areas. Additional funds for future
investments can also be generated by optimizing the existing
portfolio of brands and equity investments. Through the
fourth key building block of the Group strategy we will
safeguard the financing of the Volkswagen Group and place it
on a solid basis.
GOALS AND KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS OF THE GROUP’S
STRATEGY
The strategic initiatives describe how we intend to achieve
our vision of being one of the world’s leading providers of
sustainable mobility. For this purpose, we have defined four
target dimensions – excited customers, excellent employer,
role model for the environment, safety and integrity, and
competitive profitability – which are designed to help us
grow sustainably.
Although these target dimensions apply throughout the
Group, the strategic KPIs that we will use in the future to
measure how well we have implemented our Group strategy,
depend on the respective business model. After all, the busi-

BUILDING BLOCKS AND STRATEGIC GROUP INITIATIVES
TRANSFORM
CORE BUSINESS
BUILD
MOBILITY SOLUTIONS
BUSINESS
· Establish mobility
 solutions business
· Develop and expand
 attractive and protable
 smart mobility oering
· Improve
 operational excellence
· Optimize
 business portfolio
· Integrate strategy
 and planning process
SECURE
FUNDING
STRENGTHEN
INNOVATION POWER
· Drive digital transformation
· Create organization 4.0
· Sharpen positioning of brands
· Develop successful vehicle and drivetrain portfolio
· Partner with regional players to win in economy segment
· Streamline modular toolkits
· Implement model line organization
· Realign “Components” business
· Develop battery technology as new core competency
· Develop self-driving system for autonomous vehicles and articial intelligence
· Develop best-in-class user experience across brands and customer touchpoints
Group Management Report Goals and Strategies 53
ness model for our passenger car-producing brands is
different from that for trucks and buses and also from that of
our Power Engineering Business Area and our services
business.
In the following, we describe the Group’s strategic goals
attached to these target dimensions.
The strategic KPIs of the competitive profitability target
dimension have been defined and anchored uniformly in the
Group. As the new Group strategy has yet to be specified in
detail, the content of some strategic KPIs in the other target
dimensions is still being determined. The relevance of the
KPIs is reviewed at Group level and their focus continuously
monitored and adjusted as necessary. We report on the
defined nonfinancial strategic KPIs in the “Corporate
Governance Report” and “Sustainable Value Enhancement”
sections.
Target dimension: excited customers
This target dimension focuses on the diverse needs of our
customers and on tailor-made mobility solutions. We aspire
to exceed our customers’ expectations, generating maximum
benefit for them. That calls not only for the best products, the
most efficient solutions and the best service, but also for
flawless quality and an outstanding image. We want to excite
our existing customers, win over new ones and retain their
loyalty in the long term – because only loyal and faithful
customers will recommend us to others.
The strategic KPIs consist of the conquest rate and KPIs
pertaining to loyalty, customer satisfaction and quality.
Target dimension: excellent employer
Skilled and dedicated employees are one of the keys to
sustainable success. We wish to promote their satisfaction
and motivation by means of equal opportunities, an
attractive and modern working environment, and a forwardlooking organization of work. Exemplary leadership and
corporate culture forms the foundation for this, enabling us
to retain our core workforce and attract new talent.
The strategic KPIs of this target dimension cover internal
employer attractiveness determined by means of the opinion
survey, external employer attractiveness, an external
employer ranking as well as a KPI pertaining to cross-brand
exchange and rotation and the diversity index.
Target dimension: role model for environment, safety and integrity
Every day, we at the Volkswagen Group assume and exercise
responsibility in relation to the environment, safety and
society. This is reflected in our thoughts and actions and in all
our decisions in equal measure.
We pay particular attention to the use of resources and
the emissions of our product portfolio as well as those of our
sites and plants, with the goal of continuously improving our
carbon footprint and lowering pollutant emissions. Through
innovations and outstanding quality, we aim for maximum
product safety.
The most important principles in this process include
compliance with laws and regulations, the establishment of
secure processes, and dealing openly with mistakes so that
they can be avoided or rectified in the future. In terms of
integrity, Volkswagen aims to become a role model for a
modern, transparent and successful enterprise.
The strategic KPIs of this target dimension include the
decarbonization index and KPIs pertaining to emissions
figures, compliance, a culture of dealing openly with mistakes, and integrity.
Target dimension: competitive profitability
Investors judge us by whether we are able to meet our
obligations as regards interest payments and debt repayments. As equity holders, they expect appropriate dividends
and a long-term increase in the value of their shares.
We make investments with a view to achieving profitable
growth and strengthening our competitiveness, thus keeping
the Volkswagen Group on a firm footing and ensuring it
remains an attractive investment option.
The goals we have set ourselves are operational excellence
in all business processes and becoming the benchmark for
the entire industry.
The strategic KPIs are operationalized for internal management purposes: target and actual data are derived from
Volkswagen Group figures.
STRATEGIC KPIS: COMPETITIVE PROFITABILITY
2015 2025
Operating return on sales1 6.0% 7 to 8%
Research and development ratio
(R&D ratio) in the Automotive
Division 7.4% ~6%
Capex/sales revenue in the
Automotive Division 6.9% ~6%
Net cash flow in the
Automotive Division €8,887 million >€10 billion
Payout ratio negative 30%
Net liquidity in the Automotive
Division
€24,522 million,
11.5%
~10% of
consolidated
sales revenue
Return on investment (ROI) in the
Automotive Division –0.2% >15%
1 2015 before special items. 
54 Internal Management System and Key Performance Indicators Group Management Report
The Volkswagen Group’s performance and success can be
measured by both financial and nonfinancial key performance indicators. With the Operational Excellence Group
initiative, we aim to improve these indicators throughout all
areas and along the entire value chain.
In the following, we first describe the internal management process and then explain the Volkswagen Group’s core
performance indicators.
INTERNAL MANAGEMENT PROCESS IN THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP
The Integrate Strategy and Planning Process Group initiative
is focused on continuity and even closer dovetailing of the
Group and brand strategies with the operational planning
process. This enhances transparency when it comes to the
financial assessment and the evaluation of directional decisions. The operational medium-term planning that is conducted once a year and generally covers a period of five years
is incorporated into the strategic planning as a key management element of the Group.
Medium-term planning forms the core of our operational
planning and is used to formulate and safeguard the
requirements for realizing strategic projects designed to meet
Group targets in both technical and economic terms – and
particularly in relation to earnings, cash flow and liquidity
effects. In addition, it is used to coordinate all business areas
with respect to the strategic action areas concerned: functions/processes, products and markets.
When planning the Company’s future, the individual planning components are determined on the basis of the timescale involved:
> the long-term unit sales plan, which sets out market and
segment growth and then derives the Volkswagen Group’s
delivery volumes from them,
> the product program as the strategic, long-term factor
determining corporate policy,
> capacity and utilization planning for the individual sites.
The coordinated results of the upstream planning processes
are used as the basis for the medium-term financial planning:
the Group’s financial planning, including the brands and
business fields, comprises the income statement, cash flow
and balance sheet planning, profitability and liquidity, as well
as the upfront investments needed for alternative products
and the implementation of strategic options. The first year of
the medium-term planning period is fixed and a budget
drawn up for the individual months. This is planned in detail
down to the level of the operating cost centers.
The budget is reviewed each month throughout the year
Group Management Report Internal Management System and Key Performance Indicators 55
CORE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS IN THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP
The Volkswagen Group’s internal management system is
based on nine core performance indicators, which are derived
from our strategic goals:
> Deliveries to customers
> Sales revenue
> Operating result
> Operating return on sales
> Research and development ratio (R&D ratio) in the Automotive Division
> Capex/sales revenue in the Automotive Division
> Net cash flow in the Automotive Division
> Net liquidity in the Automotive Division
> Return on investment (ROI) in the Automotive Division
Deliveries to customers are defined as handovers of new
vehicles to the end customer. This figure shows the popularity of our products and is the measure we use to determine
our competitive position in the various markets. Deliveries
are closely related to our targets of exciting our customers,
being a role model in terms of the environment, safety and
integrity, and being an excellent employer. One of the most
important prerequisites for the Company’s long-term success
is a strong brand portfolio that – on the basis of outstanding
quality – offers tailor-made mobility solutions with safe,
resource-efficient vehicles, thus meeting the diverse needs of
customers. Demand for our products guarantees not only
unit sales and production, but also full utilization of our sites
and the jobs of our employees. The goals we are striving for
cannot be achieved without a skilled, dedicated workforce
and a consensus on shared values.
Sales revenue, which does not include the figures for our
equity-accounted Chinese joint ventures, reflects our market
success in financial terms. Following adjustment for our use
of resources, the operating result reflects the Company’s
actual business activity and documents the economic success
of our core business. The operating return on sales is the ratio
of the operating result to sales revenue.
The research and development ratio (R&D ratio) in the
Automotive Division shows total research and development
costs in relation to sales revenue. Research and development
costs comprise a range of expenses, from futurology through
to the development of marketable products. Particular emphasis is placed on the environmentally friendly orientation of
our product portfolio, digitalization and new technologies.
The R&D ratio underscores the efforts made to ensure the

Company’s future viability: the goal of competitive profitability geared to sustainable growth.
The ratio of capex (investments in property, plant and
equipment, investment property and intangible assets,
excluding capitalized development costs) to sales revenue in
the Automotive Division reflects both our innovative power
and our future competitiveness. It shows our capital expenditure – largely for modernizing, expanding and digitalizing
our product range and for environmentally friendly
drivetrains, as well as for adjusting production capacities and
improving production processes – in relation to the Automotive Division’s sales revenue.
Net cash flow in the Automotive Division represents the
excess funds from operating activities available for dividend
payments, for example. It is calculated as cash flows from
operating activities less cash flows from investing activities
attributable to operating activities.
Net liquidity in the Automotive Division is the total of
cash, cash equivalents, securities, loans and time deposits not
financed by third-party borrowings. To safeguard our business activities, we have formulated the strategic target that
net liquidity in the Automotive Division should amount to
approximately 10% of the consolidated sales revenue.
We use the return on investment (ROI) to calculate the
return on invested capital for a particular period in the Automotive Division, including the Chinese joint ventures on a
proportionate basis, by calculating the ratio of the operating
result after tax to average invested capital. If the return on
investment (ROI) exceeds the market cost of capital, the value
of the Company has increased. This is how we measure the
financial success of our brands, locations and vehicle
projects.
You can find information on and explanations of the sales
figures and the Volkswagen Group’s financial key performance indicators on pages 101 to 107 and on pages 114 to
128, respectively.
Detailed descriptions of our activities and additional
nonfinancial key performance indicators in the areas of sustainability, research and development, procurement, production, sales and marketing, quality assurance, employees,
information technology and the environment can be found
in the chapter entitled “Sustainable Value Enhancement”
beginning on page 133 of this annual report. Nonfinancial
key performance indicators related to compliance are
described in the “Corporate Governance Report” on page 65. 
56 Structure and Business Activities Group Management Report
OUTLINE OF THE LEGAL STRUCTURE OF THE GROUP
Volkswagen AG is the parent company of the Volkswagen
Group. It develops vehicles and components for the Group’s
brands, but also produces and sells vehicles, in particular
passenger cars and light commercial vehicles for the Volkswagen Passenger Cars and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles
brands. In its capacity as parent company, Volkswagen AG
holds indirect or direct interests in AUDI AG, SEAT S.A.,
ŠKODA AUTO a.s., Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG, Scania AB,
MAN SE, Volkswagen Financial Services AG, Volkswagen Bank
GmbH and a large number of other companies in Germany
and abroad. More detailed disclosures are contained in
the list of shareholdings in accordance with sections 285 and
313 of the Handelsgesetzbuch (HGB – German Commercial
Code), which can be accessed at www.volkswagenag.com/en/
InvestorRelations.html and is part of the annual financial
statements.
Volkswagen AG is a vertically integrated energy supply
company as defined by section 3 no. 38 of the Energiewirtschaftsgesetz (EnWG – German Energy Industry Act) and
is therefore subject to the provisions of the EnWG. In the electricity sector, Volkswagen AG generates, sells and distributes
electricity together with a Group subsidiary.
Volkswagen AG’s Board of Management is the ultimate
body responsible for managing the Group. The Supervisory
Board appoints, monitors and advises the Board of Management; it is consulted directly on decisions that are of fundamental significance for the Company.
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE GROUP
The Volkswagen Group is one of the leading multibrand
groups in the automotive industry. The Company’s business
activities comprise the Automotive and Financial Services
divisions. All brands within the Automotive Division – with
the exception of the Volkswagen Passenger Cars and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles brands – are independent legal
entities.
The Automotive Division comprises the Passenger Cars,
Commercial Vehicles and Power Engineering business areas.
The Passenger Cars Business Area essentially consolidates the
Volkswagen Group’s passenger car brands. Activities focus on
the development of vehicles and engines, the production and
sale of passenger cars, and the genuine parts business. The
product portfolio ranges from fuel-efficient compact cars to
luxury vehicles and also includes motorcycles, and will
gradually be supplemented by mobility solutions.
The Commercial Vehicles Business Area primarily comprises the development, production and sale of light commercial vehicles, trucks and buses from the Volkswagen
Commercial Vehicles, Scania and MAN brands, the corresponding genuine parts business and related services. The
collaboration between the MAN and Scania commercial
vehicle brands is coordinated within the TRATON GROUP. The
commercial vehicles portfolio ranges from pickups to heavy
trucks and buses.
The Power Engineering Business Area combines the largebore diesel engines, turbomachinery, special gear units,
propulsion components and testing systems businesses.
The activities of the Financial Services Division comprise
dealer and customer financing, vehicle leasing, direct banking
and insurance activities, as well as fleet management and
mobility offerings.
With its brands, the Volkswagen Group is present in all
relevant markets around the world. The Group’s key sales
markets currently include Western Europe, China, the USA,
Brazil, Russia and Mexico.
Volkswagen AG and the Volkswagen Group are managed
by the Volkswagen AG Board of Management in accordance
with the Volkswagen AG Articles of Association and the rules
of procedure for Volkswagen AG’s Board of Management
issued by the Supervisory Board.

Structure and Business Activities
This chapter describes the legal and organizational structure of the Volkswagen Group
and explains the material changes in 2018 with respect to equity investments. 
Group Management Report Structure and Business Activities 57
To further enhance its leadership and management model,
the Volkswagen Group introduced an additional internal
operational structure in spring 2018. Volkswagen is convinced that this will allow better use of existing competences
and economies of scale, make it possible to leverage synergies
more systematically and accelerate decision making.
In addition to the Finance & IT, Human Resources and
Integrity and Legal Affairs divisions, the Volkswagen Group
collaborates across six operating units and the China region,
these being the “Volume”, “Premium”, “Sport & Luxury”,
“Truck & Bus” brand groups, as well as the Components &
Procurement and Financial Services operating units. The
“Volume” brand group comprises the Volkswagen Passenger
Cars, SEAT, ŠKODA and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles
brands. The Audi, Lamborghini and Ducati brands are
brought together in the “Premium” brand group. “Sport &
Luxury” is comprised of the Porsche, Bentley and Bugatti
brands. The “Truck & Bus” brand group is the umbrella for
the Scania and MAN brands. Components & Procurement will
function as one unit spanning all of the brands and supporting them. The Financial Services business has been
combined into a single unit.
 This prepares the Volkswagen Group for a management
structure that is simpler, leaner and more effective, and
strengthens the brands, giving them more autonomy. In line
with the principle of subsidiarity, decisions will be taken at
the lowest competent level, close to business operations.
At the same time, spreading the Group’s management
duties more broadly means that responsibility is assigned
more clearly and definitively. Every member of the Board of
Management has assumed additional higher-level duties for
the Group. At the same time, the members of the Board of
Management of Volkswagen AG have responsibility for a
brand group or operating unit, improving collaboration
between the brands and the Group as a whole and ensuring
that management of the Group is a shared undertaking.
Each brand in the Volkswagen Group is managed by a
brand board of management, which ensures its independent
and self-contained development and business operations. To
the extent permitted by law, the board adheres to the Group
targets and requirements laid down by the Board of
Management of Volkswagen AG, as well as with the agreements in the brand groups. This allows Group-wide interests
to be pursued, while at the same time safeguarding and
reinforcing each brand’s specific characteristics. Matters that
are of importance to the Group as a whole are submitted to
the Group Board of Management in order to reach agreement
between the parties involved, to the extent permitted by law.
The rights and obligations of the statutory bodies of the
relevant brand company remain unaffected.
The companies of the Volkswagen Group are managed by
their respective managements on their own responsibility. In
addition to the interests of their own companies, the
management of each individual company takes into account
the interests of the Group, the relevant brand group and the
individual brands in accordance with the framework laid
down by law.
At Group level, committees also address key strategic
issues, for example relating to product planning, investments, risks management and management issues. The
portfolio of these committees and the regulation landscape
at Group level was revised in the reporting year and, in the
course of this, a committee was established to manage the
technology strategy. This has reduced complexity and reinforced governance within the Group.
Within our future program TOGETHER – Strategy 2025,
the Organization 4.0 Group initiative is also supporting the
Company’s transformation. The aim of this initiative is to
connect activities across divisions, initiate new organizational approaches and anchor these in the Group for the long
term. This will not only enable but actively create holistic
stimulus for innovation, entrepreneurship and change.
MATERIAL CHANGES IN EQUITY INVESTMENTS
The control and profit and loss transfer agreement between
MAN SE, as the controlled company, and TRATON SE (at that
time Volkswagen Truck & Bus AG), a wholly owned subsidiary
of Volkswagen AG, as the controlling company, came into
force upon its entry in the commercial register on July 16,
2013. The conclusion of the control and profit and loss
transfer agreement replaced, the group based on the de facto
exercise of management control with a contractual group,
permitting considerably more efficient and less bureaucratic
cooperation between the MAN Group and the rest of the
Volkswagen Group. In the summer of 2018, the Higher
Regional Court in Munich made a final decision in the award
proceedings regarding the appropriateness of the cash
settlement and the right to compensation for the noncontrolling interest shareholders of MAN SE, ruling that the
cash settlement amount set out in the contract should be
increased to €90.29 per share and the annual compensation
to €5.47 gross per share. Following the entry of the final
decisions in the commercial register in August 2018, the
noncontrolling interest shareholders were entitled to tender
their shares in accordance with section 305 of the Aktiengesetz (AktG – German Stock Corporation Act) within a twomonth period. The decision in the award proceedings
resulted in a significant increase in the annual compensation
to be paid to noncontrolling interest shareholders of MAN SE.
In the opinion of the Board of Management at TRATON SE (at
 
58 Structure and Business Activities Group Management Report
that time TRATON AG), this was no longer proportionate to
the profit transfer from MAN SE and other benefits stipulated
in the control and profit and loss transfer agreement;
TRATON SE therefore exercised its right to extraordinary
termination in accordance with section 304(4) of the German
Stock Corporation Act on August 22, 2018 and terminated the
control and profit and loss transfer agreement effective
January 1, 2019. As of year-end 2018, TRATON SE held
87.04 (75.73)% of the ordinary shares and 83.05 (46.95)% of
the preferred shares in MAN SE. Following the announcement
of the termination of the control and profit and loss transfer
agreement and the recording thereof in the commercial
register on January 3, 2019, the noncontrolling shareholders
of MAN SE once again had the right to tender their shares to
TRATON SE, pursuant to the provisions of the control and
profit and loss transfer agreement, within a two-month
period at a cash settlement price of €90.29.
With the Optimize business portfolio Group initiative, the
Board of Management intends to ensure the VolkswagenAutomotive segment Deliveries to customers: solid increase In 2016, the Automotive segment sold a record number of vehicles for the sixth year in succession. Dynamic market conditions, particularly in Europe, influenced automobile sales volumes more strongly than expected. Consumer spending in the UK in 2016 remained stable, despite the Brexit decision. The upward trend from the previous year in southern European countries also continued unbroken. Despite growing political and economic uncertainties in the international environment, deliveries to customers increased by a solid 5.3% to a total of 2,367,603 1 BMW, MINI and Rolls Royce brand vehicles (2015: 2,247,485 1 units). BMW, the Group’s core brand, reported a solid 5.2% increase to 2,003,359 1 units (2015: 1,905,234 1 units), taking it over the two-million-unit threshold for the first time in a single year. MINI also recorded solid growth, with deliveries to customers up by 6.4% to 360,233 units (2015: 338,466 units). Rolls-Royce Motor Cars sold 4,011 units (2015: 3,785 units; + 6.0%). In the Annual Report 2015, the outlook for the full year 2016 had foreseen a slight increase in sales volume. The generally positive sentiment among consumers, especially in Europe, but also in Asia, helped the BMW Group to exceed its original forecast. Fleet carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions 2 : slight decrease The fleet-wide deployment of Efficient Dynamics technologies – including drivetrain electrification – contributes to the efficient reduction of carbon dioxide emissions. CO2 emissions produced by the vehicle fleet sold in Europe (EU-28) decreased slightly to 124 grams CO2 / km (2015: 127 grams CO2 / km; – 2.4%) in the year under report. As foreseen in the outlook for the full year 2016, fleet carbon emissions fell slightly and were therefore in line with forecast. 1 Including the joint venture BMW Brilliance Automotive Ltd., Shenyang (2016: 316,200 units, 2015: 282,000 units). 2 EU-28. 39 Revenues: slight increase Automotive segment revenues edged up by 1.0 % to a new record figure of € 86,424 million (2015: € 85,536 million), with currency exchange effects holding down the scale of the increase. The forecast of a slight rise in Automotive segment revenues made in the Annual Report 2015 therefore was confirmed. EBIT margin in target range of between 8 and 10% The EBIT margin in the Automotive segment (profit before financial result divided by revenues) came in at 8.9% (2015: 9.2%; – 0.3 percentage points). As foreseen for the financial year 2016, the EBIT margin from automobile business was within the target range of between 8 and 10% and therefore in line with expectations. Return on capital employed (RoCE): slight increase The return on capital employed (RoCE) amounted to 74.3% (2015: 72.2%; +2.1 percentage points). Amongst other factors, transactions with other segments and the expansion of business with service and Connected Drive contracts made positive contributions to RoCE for the Automotive segment. The outlook for RoCE, which was already raised in the Quarterly Report to 30 June 2016 from a moderate decrease to a slight decrease, was once more exceeded. In the Annual Report 2015, a moderate decrease in RoCE was foreseen. The rate achieved by the Automotive segment in 2016 was therefore once again well above the minimum target of 26%. Motorcycles segment Deliveries to customers: solid increase In a highly favourable market environment, most notably in Europe, BMW Motorrad reported a solid 5.9% increase, with 145,032 units sold (2015: 136,963 units). These figures benefited from unexpectedly good sales figures for Europe and Latin America. The forecast increase, upgraded in the Quarterly Report to 30 June 2016 from slight to solid, was therefore realised. In the Annual Report 2015, only a slight increase in deliveries to customers had been foreseen for the Motorcycles segment. Return on capital employed: slight increase The Motorcycles segment generated a return on capital employed (RoCE) of 33.0% in the year under report (2015: 31.6%; + 1.4 percentage points), slightly above the previous year, mainly reflecting effective working capital management and the improvement in earnings. The reported figures also benefited from the trend towards high-value models and the new brand strategy initiated in 2014. The forecast RoCE, which had already been changed from a slight decrease to “at the previous year’s level” in the Quarterly Report to 30 June 2016, was therefore once again exceeded. In the Annual Report 2015, a slight decrease in RoCE had been foreseen. Research and Development www.bmwgroup.com/innovation Research and development are of central importance for the BMW Group as a premium manufacturer. As part of the Efficient Dynamics strategy, continual efforts are undertaken to improve energy efficiency and reduce emissions across the full range of automobiles and motorcycles. In line with its Connected Drive strategy, the BMW Group is engaged in work on the connectedness of driver, vehicle and the outside world. The Group seeks to take a leading position in the field of autonomous driving. At 31 December 2016, a total of 13,103 people at 13 locations in five countries worldwide were employed in the BMW Group’s research and innovation network. Research and development expenditure totalled € 5,164 million during the year under report, in line with the previous twelve-month period (2015: € 5,169 million; – 0.0%). At 5.5%, the research and development expenditure ratio was also practically identical to that of the preceding year (2015: 5.6%). The ratio of capitalised development costs to total research and development expenditure for the period (capitalisation ratio) was 40.5% (2015: 39.9%). Amortisation of capitalised development costs totalled € 1,222 million (2015: € 1,166 million; + 4.8%). Further information on research and development expenditure is provided in the “Report on Economic Position (Results of Operations)” and in note 7 to the Group Financial Statements. Given the pace of technological change, collaboration in the field of research and development is customary in the automotive industry. The BMW Group also enters into collaboration arrangements with selected partners. The aim of these research and development activities, which may also include cross-sector cooperation, is to help find innovative solutions for individual mobility. The focus is on future-oriented technologies such as digitalisation and alternative drive systems. see note 7 51 Expertise in drivetrain technology The BMW Group is consistently extending its portfolio of electrically powered vehicles. At the end of 2016, it included the BMWi3 all-electric, battery-powered vehicle, six plug-in hybrid vehicles for the global market, and an additional plug-in hybrid exclusively developed for the Chinese market. In 2016, an additional version of the BMWi3 was launched, featuring significantly greater battery capacity. The vehicle is also available with or without a range extender. During the reporting year, plans were laid for both the first all-electric MINI and for an electrically powered BMW X3. In 2017, the new BMW 5 Series and the MINI Countryman are both due to be launched as plug-in hybrid versions. A roadster version of the BMWi8 has also been announced for 2018. With its C-evolution, BMW Motorrad presented in 2016 the second edition of an all-electric “Maxi Scooter” with greatly improved range and higher top speed. For the medium and long term, the BMW Group is also developing a fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV). The fuel cell electric drive system, which converts hydrogen to electricity and steam, combines locally emission-free, electrically powered driving with the dynamic flair typical of the BMW brand, capability for covering long distances, and short refuelling times. Battery and fuel cell technology can be combined in one vehicle. At the same time, the BMW Group continues to work on enhancing its existing range of highly efficient combustion engines. 2016 saw the launch of the new BMW 7 Series, featuring a newly developed inline 6-cylinder diesel engine that combines high performance with low fuel consumption. The BMW 1 and 2 Series M Performance models were presented with a new, powerful inline 6-cylinder petrol engine in 2016. Driver assistance systems, highly and fully automated driving The new BMW 5 Series offers drivers extensive support with a variety of assistance systems. It is fitted with a stereo camera as standard, which monitors the vehicle’s environment together with optionally available radar and ultrasound sensors. New features in the BMW 5 Series include an avoidance assistant, a crossing-traffic warning, a lane-change assistant and a lane control assistant with active side collision protection, which monitors the driving lanes and developments next to the vehicle and actively supports the driver in the event of imminent collision with a corrective steering intervention. With extended functions built into the optionally available Active Cruise Control (ACC) and the steering and lane control assistant, the BMW 5 Series represents a further step towards automated driving, including recognition of speed limits, which the optional Speed Limit Assist shows the driver. The assistance system supports the driver in keeping a correct distance at speeds up to 210 km / h as well as at accelerating and braking. These features offer drivers a significant benefit in terms of convenience, particularly at low speeds and in slow-moving traffic. The optional Remote Parking feature of the BMW 5 Series Sedan enables drivers to manoeuvre the vehicle into the tightest of parking spaces using a remote-control car key. At the same time, the BMW Group is conducting research into highly automated systems that do not need to be permanently monitored by the driver and fully automated systems that no longer require the driver to monitor them at all. At the end of 2016, some 600 BMW Group employees were engaged in the development of highly automated driving technologies. Beginning in 2017, the BMW Group plans to concentrate its expertise in the field of vehicle connectivity and automated driving at one location. 52 Combined Management Report Report on Economic Position Review of Operations Research and Development BMW Connected digital platform presented With BMW Connected, the BMW Group presented a comprehensive digital concept that facilitates individual mobility. Based on a flexible platform, BMW Connected seamlessly combines the vehicle with the digital life of the user through user devices such as smartphones. The functions of existing BMW ConnectedDrive apps will be integrated in BMW Connected. The security and anonymisation of data have the highest priority for the BMW Group, both internally and for its customers. Digital connectivity has also become a key topic for the Group’s motorcycles. With its optionally available “Intelligent Emergency Call”, BMW Motorrad has announced that eCall for urgent help in case of emergency or accidents will also be added as a feature of its motorcycles as from 2017. Next generation of the AirTouch virtual touchscreen The BMW Group made further progress in the field of interaction between the driver and the vehicle during the year under report. Following up on BMW Gesture Control, which is already available for the new BMW 5 and 7 Series, in 2016 the Group presented its enhanced AirTouch system, which enables drivers to use simple gestures with an open hand to activate command fields on a large panorama screen on the dashboard. At the beginning of 2017, the BMW HoloActive Touch system was presented to the public for the first time. The innovative interface between driver and vehicle is similar to a virtual touchscreen, which is operated using finger gestures on a screen that appears to float freely in space. Extreme lightweight construction in the BMW HP4 BMW Motorrad demonstrated with the exclusive BMW HP4 RACE experimental motorcycle how extreme lightweight construction can be realised based on carbon fibre technology. Among other features, this motorcycle, which is fit for racing, is equipped with a highly innovative frame structure made of pure carbon as well as carbon wheel-rims. Numerous awards for innovations The BMW Group won over 50 national and international awards during the year under report. Among other honours, the BMW 7 Series was named World Luxury Car at the renowned World Car Awards. At the “International Engine of the Year Award”, the most prestigious engine competition worldwide, the drivetrain of the BMWi8 was winner in the 1.4- to 1.8-litre category. At the Automotive Innovations Award, jointly awarded by the Center of Automotive Management and the auditing and consulting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers, BMW drivetrains were adjudged to be the most innovative conventional systems across all models. The BMWi3 won the “Golden Steering Wheel” award in the “Alternative drives” category. In 2016, the BMW Group won numerous design awards, including the International Forum Design Awards for its Rolls-Royce Dawn, MINI Clubman, MINI Convertible, BMW M2, BMW X1 and BMW 7 Series. Sustainability www.bmwgroup.com/responsibility Economic success, the responsible use of resources and the assumption of social responsibilities form the basis for long-term growth within the BMW Group. The Group secures the future of its business model through sustainable activity. In promoting sustainability, the BMW Group concentrates on three areas: — the development of products and services for sustainable individual mobility (for example electric mobility and services such as DriveNow and ReachNow) — the efficient use of resources along the entire value chain — responsibility towards employees and society in general Through its sustainability policy, the BMW Group is supporting the achievement of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), which were adopted in September 2015. Further information on the subject of sustainability within the BMW Group and related topics is provided in the Sustainable Value Report 2016, published online at www.bmwgroup.com. The Sustainable Value Report is drawn up in accordance with the Guidelines of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI G4), the most widely used set of guidelines for sustainability reporting worldwide. The Sustainable Value Report corresponds to the “comprehensive” option, in which all relevant information and indicators of the aspects identified as essential are reported on. It will be published at the same time as the Annual Report 2016. 59 Social dialogue and materiality analysis as a basis for sustainability management The BMW Group is in continual dialogue with a large number of stakeholders, both in Germany and abroad. Dialogue helps the Company to recognise global trends at an early stage, achieve sustainability objectives more effectively and strengthen social commitment. In the course of this dialogue, the BMW Group gains a clear picture of how current trends are changing the business environment and what role the BMW Group can play. For example, stakeholder dialogue events on the topic of urban mobility were held in Seattle, Boston, Madrid, Tokyo and Barcelona during the period under report. In order to identify important sustainability topics at an early stage, the BMW Group also conducts materiality analyses on a regular basis. Moreover, social challenges are continually monitored and analysed in order to gauge their significance, from the point of view of both external and internal stakeholders. The materiality analysis is used to create a materiality matrix, which is used as a basis to check the strategic direction of sustainability management. The materiality matrix is described in greater detail in the Sustainable Value Report 2016. Although energy and water consumption per vehicle produced rose slightly, both the use of resources and the production-related emissions fell by an average of 4.9% in 2016. However, the slight increase in energy and water consumption per vehicle produced gave rise to additional costs totalling € 2.8 million. The reduction in resource consumption and production-related emissions per vehicle produced since 2006 corresponds to a cost saving of € 155.3 million. Sustainability along the value chain Sustainability criteria also play a key role when selecting and assessing suppliers as well as in the field of transport logistics. The BMW Group has therefore integrated a comprehensive sustainability management strategy in its purchasing processes. The positive business performance in recent years has also caused a significant rise in the Group’s transportation requirements worldwide. The principle adhered to by the BMW Group that “production follows the market” is an effective method of significantly reducing the need for transportation, therefore keeping CO2 emissions as low as possible. Automotive segment Deliveries to customers: slight increase expected The BMW Group expects a further year-on-year increase in sales of BMW, MINI and Rolls-Royce brand vehicles and aims to achieve again in 2017 a leading position in the global premium segment. Balanced growth in major sales regions will help to even out volatilities in individual markets. Assuming economic conditions do not deteriorate, deliveries to customers are forecast to rise slightly to a new high (2016: 2,367,6031 units) in 2017. Important contributions to continued growth will come in particular from new models. The all-new BMW 5 Series Sedan has been available since mid-February 2017. The BMW 5 Series iPerformance and M Performance models followed in March. The BMW 5 Series iPerformance model as a plug-in hybrid is now available worldwide. The model revisions of the BMW 4 Series and the BMW M4 Coupé and Convertible were also launched in March. The new BMW 5 Series Touring is scheduled for launch in midJune. The second generation of its highly successful MINI Countryman model was introduced in February. Towards the middle of year, a John Cooper Works and a plug-in hybrid will be added to the MINI Countryman range. Further new models are planned for the second half of 2017. Fleet carbon dioxide emissions2 : slight decrease expected The BMW Group is continuing its efforts to reduce fuel consumption and carbon dioxide emissions. According to forecasts, carbon dioxide emissions for the vehicle fleet will decrease slightly during the outlook period, thus continuing the trend seen in previous years (2016: 124 grams CO2 / km). Revenues: slight increase expected Automotive segment revenues are expected to rise slightly in line with sales volume. The Company expects that segment revenues will increase slightly in 2017 (2016: € 86,424 million). Macroeconomic risks and opportunities Economic conditions influence business performance and hence the results of operations, financial position and net assets of the BMW Group. Unforeseen disruptions in global economic ties can have highly unpredictable effects. Macroeconomic risks can lead to reduced purchasing power in the countries and regions involved and lead to reduced demand for the products and services offered by the BMW Group. If macroeconomic risks were to materialise, they could – due to sales volume fluctuations – have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. Overall, the risk level attached to macroeconomic risks is classified as high. Macroeconomic risks are evaluated on the basis of historical data and by means of a cash-flow-at-risk approach, supplemented by scenario analyses. Given the political events that have occurred during the financial year under report, future global economic developments are currently subject to a high degree of uncertainty, in particular with respect to potential barriers that could affect global trade. The outcome of the elections in the USA in November 2016, the planned exit of the UK from the EU and possible election wins for anti-globalisation parties in the EU in the coming years could result in higher tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade. 91 The possible introduction of trade barriers by the new US administration could have an adverse impact on the BMW Group’s operations in the form of less favourable conditions for importing vehicles. Moreover, countermeasures by the USA’s trading partners could slow down global economic growth and consequently have an adverse impact on the export of vehicles produced in the USA. The BMW Group’s production strategy involves local production both in the USA and in other important trading regions. The strategy of regional production reduces the existing risk of trade barriers. Nevertheless, any increase in trade barriers would have an adverse impact on the BMW Group. The Brexit plan could have a long-term adverse impact on the BMW Group, particularly as a result of increased trade barriers in relation to the European single market. In the short and medium term, too, uncertainty regarding the outcome of the negotiations with the EU could lead to reduced customer spending and trigger further unfavourable currency effects. Unresolved structural problems in the eurozone, a potential increase in anti-globalisation political sentiment and a possible renewed economic downturn could potentially hold down growth prospects for the BMW Group. European integration with a unified economic and currency area remains an important pillar of economic stability in Europe. The transition of the Chinese economy from an investment-driven to a consumer-driven market is likely to entail slower growth rates and greater instability on financial markets. If the Chinese economy were to grow at a significantly slower pace than expected, the consequence could be not only a decline in automobile sales, but also, potentially, lower demand for raw materials, which would have a negative impact above all on emerging economies such as Brazil or Russia. Any renewed drop in raw material prices could result in lower demand from these countries. The threat of turmoil on the Chinese property, stock and banking markets and an overly rapid hike in interest rates by the US Federal Reserve pose considerable risks for global financial market stability. Furthermore, increasing political unrest, military conflicts, terrorist activities, natural disasters or pandemics could have a lasting negative impact on the global economy and international capital markets. The BMW Group counters macroeconomic risks primarily by internationalising its sales and production structures, in order to minimise the extent to which earnings depend on risks in individual countries and regions. Flexible sales and production processes across the BMW Group increase the ability to react quickly to regional economic developments. Should the global economy develop significantly better than reflected in the outlook, macroeconomic opportunities could arise with a potentially favourable impact on the revenues and earnings of the BMW Group. Stronger Chinese growth, economy-boosting structural reforms within the eurozone, growth stimulus through infrastructure investment in the USA or more robust consumer spending by US households despite rising financing costs, could result in significantly stronger sales volume growth, reduced competitive pressures and improved pricing. Macroeconomic opportunities that could generate a sustainable impact on earnings are currently classified by the BMW Group as insignificant. Strategic and sector risks and opportunities Changes in legislation and regulatory requirements Abrupt introduction of tightened new laws and regulations represents a significant risk for the automobile industry, particularly in relation to emissions, safety and consumer protection, as well as taxes on vehicle purchases and use. Country- and sector-specific trade barriers can also change at short notice. Unfavourable developments in any of these areas can necessitate significantly higher levels of investment and ongoing expenses or influence customer behaviour. Risks from changes in legislation and regulatory requirements could have a low impact on earnings over the two-year assessment period. The risk level attached to these risks is classified as medium. The BMW Group sees a clear move towards increasingly stringent vehicle emissions regulations, particularly for conventional drive systems, not only in the developed markets of Europe and North America, but also in emerging markets such as China. The introduction of new measurement procedures to represent standard driving cycles, combined with significantly lower emissions thresholds, represents a major challenge for the automotive sector. The BMW Group counters this risk with its Efficient Dynamics concept and continues to play a pioneering role within the premium segment in reducing both fuel consumption and emissions. Electric drive systems are being built into a growing number of models, namely in BMWi vehicles since 2013 and – following the introduction of the X5 in 2015 – in models using plug-in-hybrid technologies, thus contributing to the BMW Group’s effort to comply with statutory carbon emissions requirements. 92 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities Further risks can result from the tightening of existing import and export regulations. These lead primarily to additional expenses, but can also restrict the import and export of vehicles or parts. Increased taxes on high-value consumer goods have also been proposed in a number of regions. Taxes of this kind in major markets of the BMW Group, such as China, could have a negative impact on regional demand and margins on BMW Group vehicles in the automobile segments concerned. Setting the regulatory framework for innovative mobility solutions and providing state-funded incentives are important prerequisites for developing mobility services and introducing product innovations, such as autonomous driving. If the necessary public measures are implemented globally at a faster pace than expected, opportunities will arise for the BMW Group to expand new business segments more quickly. Alternative mobility services, such as DriveNow, ChargeNow and ParkNow, could benefit from supportive regulatory measures, for example through systematic application in German cities of car-sharing legislation that comes into force in September 2017. Access restrictions for inefficient vehicles with lower environmental standards could provide a competitive advantage and hence an opportunity for BMW Group vehicles equipped with Efficient Dynamics technologies and for BMWi and iPerformance vehicles with alternative drive systems. The market acceptance and sales volumes of product innovations that are either planned for the future or have recently been launched could turn out to be greater than predicted in the outlook. Good examples of such opportunities are implementation of the 360° ELECTRIC portfolio in the field of electric mobility, achieving growth in the field of mobility services, and collaborating with Toyota on developing a hydrogen fuel cell system. The BMW Group’s earnings could also be positively affected in the short to medium term by changes in trading policies. A possible reduction in tariff barriers, import restrictions or direct excise duties could lower the cost of materials for the BMW Group, also enabling products and services to be offered to customers at lower prices. Further opportunities from changes in legislation and regulatory requirements compared to the outlook for the earnings performance of the BMW Group are classified as insignificant. Market development In addition to the potential impact of macroeconomic factors and sector-specific political framework conditions, it is also extremely difficult to predict the impact of increasingly fierce competition among established manufacturers and the emergence of new competitors. Unforeseen consumer preferences and changes in how brands are perceived can give rise to opportunities and risks. If market risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level is classified as high. Fierce competition, particularly in Western Europe, the USA and China, is a potential reason for lower demand and for fluctuations in the regional distribution and composition of demand for vehicles and mobility services. Greater competition could potentially put pressure on selling prices and margins. Changes in customer behaviour can also be brought about by changes in public opinion, values, environmental issues and fuel or energy prices. Selling price and margin risks are measured using a scenario approach, based on a bottom-up survey of the key sales markets and an analysis of historical data. The BMW Group’s flexible selling and production processes enable risks to be reduced and opportunities in market and product segments to be taken. Local restrictions affecting product usage in specific sectors may limit BMW Group sales volumes in individual markets. In some urban areas, for instance, local measures have been or are being introduced which impose entry restrictions, road use charges or, in some situations, highly restrictive registration rules. These restrictions may affect local demand for the BMW Group vehicles affected and hence have negative repercussions on sales volume and margins. The BMW Group’s endeavours to counter this risk include offering locally emission-free vehicles (such as the BMWi3), which benefit from state subsidies and exemption rules. New opportunities are continuously being sought to create even greater added value for customers than currently expected, and thereby realise significant opportunities with respect to sales volumes and pricing. Further development of the product and mobility portfolio and expansion in growth regions are seen as the most important growth opportunities for the BMW Group in the medium to long term. Continued growth depends above all on the ability to develop innovative products and bring them to market. The range of services on offer was further expanded in 2016, including the establishment of new mobility services by ReachNow in North America and the expansion of the DriveNow offering introduced in additional European cities. Furthermore, vehicle-related services were brought onto the market. The new BMW 5 and 93 7 Series models, for instance, include the optional Driving Assistant Plus which, as a future-oriented product innovation, offers the comfort of partially autonomous driving. The BMW Group does not expect these opportunities to have a material earnings impact over the two-year assessment period compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Risks and opportunities relating to operations Risks and opportunities relating to production and technology Risks relating to production and technology often manifest themselves in the form of potential sources of production interruptions or additional expenses necessary to comply with quality standards under changed environmental conditions. If risks from the production and technology category were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level attached to production and technology is classified as high. Production stoppages and downtimes, in particular due to fire, but also to machinery and tooling-related breakdowns, IT disruptions, power failures, transportation and logistical disruptions, pose risks, against which the BMW Group has put suitable measures in place. Production structures and processes are designed from the outset with a view to minimising any potential damage and the probability of occurrence. The broad array of measures taken include technical fire protection solutions, land development measures including contingencies against flooding when facilities are expanded or new buildings added, the interchangeability of production facilities, preventative maintenance, the ability to manage spare parts across sites, and predictive planning of transportation alternatives. The risk level is also reduced by deploying flexible working hour models and working time accounts, but also as appropriate through split arrangements or by building engine types at additional sites. This makes it possible to recover quickly any backlog arising from production interruptions. Moreover, risks arising from interruptions and production downtime due to fire are also appropriately insured with insurance companies of good credit standing. In order to attain the outstanding level of quality expected of the BMW Group’s products and correspondingly high external ratings (e. g. for product safety) and reduce statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations, it may be necessary to incur a higher level of expenditure than originally forecast. In addition, availability of products may be limited, particularly at the start of production of new vehicles. These risks are mitigated through regular audits and the continual improvement of the quality management system, which ensures a high standard of quality. The BMW Group also recognises appropriate accounting provisions for statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations. Such provisions reduce the risk to earnings, as they are already included in the outlook. Further information on risks in conjunction with provisions for statutory and non-statutory warranty obligations is provided in note 31 to the Group Financial Statements. The BMW Group sees opportunities relating to production and technology primarily in the competitive edge accruing from mastering new and complex technologies. Opportunities could arise as a result of productor process-related technological innovations, as well as from organisational changes designed to improve efficiency and increase competitiveness. In the field of lightweight construction, for example, carbon is being utilised in high volumes for the first time in the automobile industry for the production of the BMWi3. In 2015, the BMW Group then introduced carbon for the BMW 7 Series. This has generated competitive benefits in the form of lower fuel consumption and better driving dynamics through reduced vehicle weight. Given the long lead times involved in developing new products and processes, additional opportunities are expected to have insignificant impact on earnings during the forecast period. Risks and opportunities relating to purchasing Purchasing risks relate primarily to supply risks caused by the failure of a supplier to deliver as well as risks associated with the quality of bought-in parts. Production problems incurred by suppliers could have adverse consequences for the BMW Group, ranging from increased expenditure through to production interruptions and a corresponding reduction in sales volume. The increasingly complex nature of the supplier network, especially at the level of lower tier suppliers, whose operations can only be indirectly influenced by the BMW Group, is a further potential cause of downtimes at supplier locations. Purchasing risks, if materialised, could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level attached to purchasing risks is classified as medium. Close cooperation between carmakers and automotive suppliers in the development and production of vehicles and the provision of services generates economic benefits, but also raises levels of dependency. Potential reasons for the failure of individual suppliers could include non-compliance with sustainability or quality standards, lack of financial strength on the part of a supplier, the occurrence of natural hazards, IT-related risks, fires or insufficient supply of raw materials. As part of the supplier pre-selection process, the BMW Group is careful to ensure compliance with the sustainability standards stipulated for the supplier see note 31 94 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities network, including the requirement to comply with internationally recognised human rights and applicable labour and social standards. The principal tool for ensuring compliance with the BMW Group Sustainability Standard is a three-stage risk management system for sustainability. In addition, the technical and financial capabilities of suppliers – especially those supplying for modular-based production – are monitored. Supplier sites are assessed for exposure to natural hazards, such as floods or earthquakes, in order to identify supply risks at an early stage and implement appropriate safeguards. Fire risks at series suppliers are evaluated by means of questionnaires and selective site inspections. In order to minimise supply risks, the BMW Group works hard to reduce the input of raw materials or to use alternative raw materials as a substitute. The BMW Group pays particular attention to the quality of the parts built into its vehicles. In order to attain a very high level of quality, it may become necessary to invest in new technological concepts or discontinue planned innovations, with the consequence that the cost of materials could exceed levels accounted for in the outlook. By monitoring and developing global supplier markets, the BMW Group continuously strives to increase its competitiveness by working together with the world’s best product and service providers. Within the Purchasing and Supplier Network opportunities emerge above all in the area of global sourcing through increased efficiency and the use of innovations developed by suppliers, which can lead to a broader range of products. Introduction of new and innovative production technologies and location-specific cost factors, in particular through local supplier structures in close proximity to new and existing BMW Group production plants, can lead to lower cost of materials for the BMW Group. The integration of previously unidentified innovations from the supplier market into the product range is a further source of opportunities. The BMW Group offers innovative suppliers numerous possibilities for creating specific contractual arrangements which are attractive for those developing innovative solutions. At regular intervals, the BMW Group honours its most inventive suppliers with the Supplier Innovation Award. The BMW Group does not expect these opportunities to have a significant earnings impact over the two-year assessment period as compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. Risks and opportunities relating to sales and marketing The BMW Group employs a global sales network, primarily comprising independent dealers, branches, subsidiaries and importers to sell its products and services. Any threat to the continued activities of parts of the sales network would entail risks for the BMW Group. If sales and marketing risks were to materialise, they are likely to have low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level is classified as low. New opportunities for the BMW Group’s brands are opening up in particular as a result of developments in the field of digital communication and connectivity. Additional opportunities could also arise if new sales channels contribute to greater brand reach to additional customer groups than currently envisaged in the forecast. Digital communication and connectivity enables consumers to be reached on a more targeted and individualised basis, thus strengthening long-term relationships and brand loyalty. The outcome is often a more intense product and brand experience for customers, which could lead to higher sales volume and have a positive impact on revenues and earnings. The BMW Group invests in advanced marketing concepts in order to intensify customer relationships. In 2016, for example, customers in the United Kingdom were able to access an online sales platform, enabling them to select, finance and buy their vehicle online. The BMW Group’s brands are also present on numerous platforms, such as Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. The BMW Group estimates the earnings impact as insignificant over the two-year assessment period as compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. 95 Information, data protection and IT The advance of digitalisation across all areas of the business raises the need for increasingly stringent requirements for the confidentiality, integrity and availability of electronically processed data and in information technology (IT) in general. The increased threat of cybercrime has changed the risk exposure of the BMW Group. In addition to intellectual property theft, BMW Group must protect itself against attacks on data integrity and availability. At the same time, regulations covering the handling of personal data are also becoming more stringent, for example with the adoption of the EU General Data Protection Regulation by the European Parliament in April 2016. If information, data protection and IT risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. Risk levels attached to these risks are classified as high. In addition to IT attacks and direct physical intervention, lack of knowledge or misconduct on the part of employees may also represent a danger to the confidentiality, integrity and availability of data and systems. Direct consequences of information, data protection and IT risks include expenses required for rapid data, information and systems recovery. Negative impacts on operational performance due to the non-availability of products and services or disruptions in spare-part or vehicle production could also be possible. A further indirect result could be reputational damage. Great importance is attached to protecting the confidentiality, integrity and availability of business information and employee and customer data, for instance against unauthorised access and misuse. Data security based on the International Standard ISO / IEC 27001 is an integral component of all business processes. As part of risk management procedures, data protection, information and IT risks are systematically documented, allocated appropriate measures by the departments responsible and regularly monitored in terms of threat level and risk mitigation. Regular analyses and controls and rigorous security management ensure an appropriate level of security. Despite regular testing and preventative security measures, it is impossible to eliminate risks completely in this area. All employees are required to treat carefully information such as confidential business, customer and employee data, to use securely information systems and handle risks with transparency. Group-wide requirements are documented in a comprehensive set of principles, guidelines and instructions, such as, for example, the Binding Corporate Rules for handling of employee data. Regular communication and information activities create a high degree of security and risk awareness among employees involved. Employees receive training to ensure compliance with the applicable requirements and in-house rules. The BMW Group protects its intellectual property as well as customer and employee data in cooperations and business partnerships by stipulating clear instructions with regard to data protection and the use of information technology. Information pertaining to key areas of expertise as well as sensitive personal data are subject to particularly strict security measures. Technical data protection incorporates industry-wide standards and best practices. Responsibility for data and information protection lies for each Group entity with the Board of Management or relevant management team. The use of information technology in new products and services, production or communication with customers opens up new opportunities. Under the slogan Industry 4.0, new approaches to production are being tested which could generate significant improvements in process and energy efficiency. The range of services and apps on offer to customers via BMW ConnectedDrive is constantly being expanded and updated. The purchase together with other companies of the firm HERE lays the foundation for the next generation of mobility and location-based services. For the automobile sector, it serves as the basis for new customer-oriented functions, such as innovative assistance systems through to fully automated driving. The BMW Group expects these opportunities to have an insignificant earnings impact over the two-year assessment period compared to the assumptions made in the outlook. 96 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities Financial risks and risks relating to the use of financial instruments Currency risks and opportunities As an internationally operating enterprise, the BMW Group conducts business in a variety of currencies, thus giving rise to currency risks and opportunities. A substantial portion of Group revenue generation, purchasing and funding occur outside the eurozone (particularly in China and the USA). Cash-flow-at-risk models and scenario analyses are used to measure currency risks and opportunities. If currency risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level attached to currency risks is medium. Significant opportunities can arise if currency developments are favourable for the BMW Group. Operational currency management is based on the results of currency risk analyses. The BMW Group manages currency risk at both the strategic (medium and long term) and operational level (short and medium term). Medium- and long-term measures include increasing production volumes and purchase volumes in foreign currency regions (natural hedging). Currency risks are managed in the short to medium term and for operational purposes by means of hedging on financial markets. Hedging transactions are entered into only with financial partners of good credit standing. Opportunities are also secured through the use of options during specific market phases. Risks and opportunities relating to raw materials As a large-scale manufacturing company, the BMW Group is exposed to purchase price risks, particularly in relation to raw materials used in vehicle production. Basis for the analysis of raw material price risk are planned purchases of raw materials and components containing those raw materials. If risks relating to raw material prices were to materialise, they would likely have a low earnings impact over the twoyear assessment period. A low risk level is attached to these risks. Significant opportunities could arise if raw material prices developed favourably for the BMW Group. Changes in commodity prices are monitored on the basis of a well-defined management process. The principal objective is to increase planning reliability for the BMW Group. Price fluctuations for precious metals (platinum, palladium, rhodium) and non-ferrous metals (aluminium, copper, lead), and, to some extent, on steel and steel ingredients (iron ore, cokecoal) and energy (gas, electricity) are hedged using financial derivatives and supply contracts with fixed pricing arrangements. Liquidity risks The major part of the Financial Services segment’s credit financing and lease business is refinanced on capital markets. Liquidity risks may be reflected in rising refinancing costs. They may also manifest themselves in restricted access to funds as a consequence of the general market situation or the failure of individual banks. If liquidity risks were to materialise, they would be likely to have a low earnings impact over the twoyear assessment period. The risk of incurring liquidity risk, including the risk of the BMW Group’s rating being downgraded and any ensuing deterioration in financing conditions, is classified as low. Based on the experience of the financial crisis, a minimum liquidity concept has been developed and is rigorously adhered to. Use of the “matched funding principle” to finance the Financial Services segment’s operations eliminates liquidity risks to a large extent. Solvency is assured at all times throughout the BMW Group by maintaining a liquidity reserve and by the broad diversification of refinancing sources. Regular measurement and monitoring ensure that cash inflows and outflows from transactions in varying maturity cycles and currencies offset each other. The relevant procedures are incorporated in the BMW Group’s target liquidity concept. The liquidity position is monitored continuously and managed by means of a cash flow requirement and sourcing forecast system in place throughout the Group. A diversified refinancing strategy reduces dependency on any specific type of instrument. Moreover, the BMW Group’s solid financial and earnings position results in the high creditworthiness ratings issued by internationally recognised rating agencies. A description of the methods applied for risk measurement and hedging in conjunction with currency and commodity risks is provided in note 37 to the Group Financial Statements. If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group as hedges are accounted for as hedging relationships. Further information on risks in conjunction with financial instruments is provided in note 37 to the Group Financial Statements. see note 37 see note 37 97 Risks and opportunities relating to pension obligations Pension obligations are influenced in particular by fluctuations of market yields on corporate bonds, as well as by other economic and demographic parameters. Opportunities and risks arise depending on the nature and scale of changes in these parameters. If risks relating to pension obligations materialised, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level relating to pension obligations is classified as medium. Within a favourable capital market environment, the return generated by pension assets may exceed expectations and reduce the deficit of the relevant pension plans. This could have a significantly favourable impact on the net asset position of the BMW Group. Future pension payments are discounted by reference to market yields on high-quality corporate bonds. These yields are subject to market fluctuation and therefore influence the level of pension obligations. Changes in other parameters, such as rises in inflation and longer life expectancy, also impact pension obligations and payments. Most of the BMW Group’s pension obligations are managed in external pension funds or trust arrangements and the related assets are kept separate from those of the Group. The amount of funds required to finance pension payments out of operations in the future is therefore substantially reduced, since most of the Group’s pension obligations are settled out of pension fund assets. The pension assets of the BMW Group comprise interest-bearing securities, equities, real estate and other investment classes. Assets held by pension funds and trust arrangements are monitored continuously and managed on a risk-and-yield basis. Diversification of investments also helps to mitigate risk. In order to reduce fluctuations in pension funding shortfalls, investments are structured to match the timing of pension payments and the expected pattern of pension obligations. Remeasurements on the liability and fund asset sides are recognised, net of deferred taxes, in “Other comprehensive income” and hence directly in equity (within revenue reserves). Further information on risks in conjunction with pension provisions is provided in note 30 to the Group Financial Statements. Risks and opportunities relating to the Financial Services segment The categories of risk relating to the provision of financial services comprise credit and counterparty risk, residual value risk, interest rate risk, operational risks and liquidity risk. Evaluation of liquidity risk for the Financial Services segment is included in the liquidity risk category for the Group as a whole. The segment’s total risk exposure was covered at all times during the 2016 financial year by the available risk-covering assets, thus ensuring the Financial Services segment’s risk-bearing capacity. Credit and counterparty risks and opportunities Credit and counterparty default risk arises within the Financial Services segment if a contractual partner (i. e. a customer or dealer) either becomes unable or only partially able to fulfil its contractual obligations, such that lower income is generated or losses incurred. If credit and counterparty risks were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level is classified as medium. The BMW Group classifies potential opportunities in this area as significant. As part of its credit and counterparty risk management system, the Financial Services segment uses a variety of rating systems in order to assess the creditworthiness of its contractual partners. Credit risks are managed at the time of the initial credit decision on the basis of a calculation of the present value of standard risk costs and subsequently, during the term of the credit, by using a range of risk provisioning techniques to cover risks resulting from changes in customer creditworthiness. In this context, individual customers are classified by category each month on the basis of their current contractual status, and appropriate levels of allowance recognised in accordance with that classification. If economies develop more favourably than assumed in the outlook, credit losses may be reduced, leading to a positive earnings impact. see note 30 98 Combined Management Report Report on Outlook, Risks and Opportunities Risks and Opportunities Residual value risks and opportunities Risks and opportunities arise in conjunction with lease contracts if the market value of a leased vehicle at the end of the contractual term of a lease differs from the residual value estimated at the inception of the lease and factored into the lease payments. A residual value risk exists if the expected market value of the vehicle at the end of the contractual term is lower than its estimated residual value at the date the contract is entered into. If residual value risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. A high and medium earnings impact would then arise for the affected Financial Services and Automotive segments, respectively. The risk level is classified as medium for the Group as a whole. Opportunities can arise out of a positive deviation between the actual market and the original residual value forecast. The BMW Group classifies potential residual value opportunities as significant. Each vehicle’s estimated residual value is calculated on the basis of historical external and internal data and used to estimate the expected market value of the vehicle at the end of the contractual period. As part of the process of managing residual value risks, a calculation is performed at the inception of each contract to determine the net present value of risk costs. Market developments are observed throughout the contractual period and the risk assessment updated. Interest rate risks and opportunities Interest rate risks in the Financial Services segment relate to potential losses caused by changes in market interest rates. They can arise when fixed interest rate periods for assets and liabilities recognised in the balance sheet do not match. If risks relating to interest rate risk were to materialise, they could have a medium earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level is classified as low. The BMW Group classifies potential interest rate opportunities as material. Interest rate risks in the Financial Services line of business are managed by raising refinancing funds with matching maturities and by employing interest-rate derivatives. If the relevant recognition criteria are fulfilled, derivatives used by the BMW Group are accounted for as hedging instruments. Further information on risks in conjunction with financial instruments is provided in note 37 to the Group Financial Statements. Operational risks in the Financial Services segment Operational risks are defined in the Financial Services segment as the risk of losses arising as a consequence of the inappropriateness or failure of internal procedures (process risks), people (personnel-related risks), systems (infrastructure and IT risks) and external events (external risks). These four categories of risk also include related legal and reputation risks. The comprehensive recording and measurement of risk scenarios, loss events and countermeasures in the operational risk management system provides the basis for a systematic analysis and management of potential or materialised operational risks. Annual self-assessments are also carried out. If operational risks were to materialise, they would be likely to have a low earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level is classified as low. Legal risks Compliance with the law is a basic prerequisite for the success of the BMW Group. Current legislation provides the binding framework for the BMW Group’s various business activities around the world. As a result of its worldwide operations, the BMW Group is exposed to a wide range of legal risks. If legal risks were to materialise, they could have a high earnings impact over the two-year assessment period. The risk level attached to significant identified legal risks is classified as medium. However, it cannot be ruled out that new legal risks, as yet unforeseen, could materialise that could have a high earnings impact for the BMW Group. The growing international scope of the BMW Group’s operations and of business interdependencies in general, combined with the variety and complexity of legal provisions, including increasingly import and export regulations, give rise to an increased risk that laws may be violated simply through lack of awareness. The BMW Group has established a Compliance Organisation aimed at ensuring that its representative bodies, managers and staff act lawfully at all times. Further information on the BMW Group’s Compliance Organisation can be found in the section “Corporate Governance”. see note 37 99 Like all internationally operating entities, the BMW Group is confronted with legal disputes relating in particular to warranty claims, product liability, infringements of protected rights and proceedings initiated by government agencies. Any of these matters could, amongst others, have an adverse impact on the Group’s reputation. Such proceedings are typical for the sector and can arise as a consequence of realigning product or purchasing strategies to suit changed market conditions. Particularly in the US market, class action lawsuits and product liability risks can have substantial financial consequences and cause damage to the Group’s public image. The application of more rigorous consumer regulations or the stricter interpretation of existing regulations could result in a greater number of recalls. The high quality of the Group’s products, which is ensured by regular quality audits and ongoing improvement measures, helps reduce this risk. The BMW Group recognises appropriate levels of provision for lawsuits. A part of these risks is insured where this makes business sense. Some risks, however, either cannot be estimated or only to a limited extent. In other cases, the incurrence of expenses or losses may be considered unlikely. Such items are reported as contingent liabilities. It cannot be ruled out, however, that losses from damages could arise that are either not covered or not fully covered by insurance policies or provisions, or as contingent liabilities. In accordance with IAS 37 (Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets), the required information is not provided if the BMW Group concludes that disclosure of the information could seriously prejudice the outcome of the relevant legal proceedings. Further information on contingent liabilities is provided in note 36 to the Group Financial Statements. Overall assessment of the risk and opportunities situation The overall risk assessment is based on a consolidated view of all significant individual risks and opportunities. The exposure to risks in the individual risk categories is essentially stable. In view of the growing importance of data and IT systems for its business, the BMW Group sees an increased need for protection in the area of information, data protection and IT systems. In view of these changes, the overall risk level for the BMW Group has increased slightly compared to the previous year. Overall, there has been no significant change in the opportunities situation compared to the previous year. In addition to the risk categories described above, unforeseen events could have a negative impact on business operations and hence on the BMW Group’s results of operations, financial position and net assets, and on its reputation. A comprehensive risk management system is in place to ensure that the BMW Group successfully manages these risks. From today’s perspective, management does not see any threat to the BMW Group’s going-concern status. As in the previous year, identified risks are considered to be manageable, but could – like the opportunities – have an impact on the BMW Group’s forecasts if they were to materialise. The BMW Group’s financial position is stable and cash needs are currently covered by available liquidity and credit lines.
OVERVIEW Segments. We have four operating segments that represent the primary businesses reported in our consolidated financial statements: Automotive, Financial Services, Ford Smart Mobility LLC, and Central Treasury Operations. Automotive Segment. Our Automotive segment primarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln brand vehicles, service parts, and accessories worldwide, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. The segment includes five regional business units: North America, South America, Europe, Middle East & Africa, and Asia Pacific. Financial Services Segment. The Financial Services segment primarily includes our vehicle-related financing and leasing activities at Ford Motor Credit Company LLC (“Ford Credit”). All Other. Ford Smart Mobility LLC and Central Treasury Operations are combined in All Other. See Note 4 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for more information regarding All Other. AUTOMOTIVE SEGMENT General Our vehicle brands are Ford and Lincoln. In 2016, we sold approximately 6,651,000 vehicles at wholesale throughout the world. See “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” (“Item 7”) for discussion of our calculation of wholesale unit volumes. Substantially all of our vehicles, parts, and accessories are sold through distributors and dealers (collectively, “dealerships”), the substantial majority of which are independently owned. At December 31, 2016, the approximate number of dealerships worldwide distributing our vehicle brands was as follows: Brand Number of Dealerships at December 31, 2016 Ford 10,608 Ford-Lincoln (combined) 915 Lincoln 214 Total 11,737 We do not depend on any single customer or a few customers to the extent that the loss of such customers would have a material adverse effect on our business. In addition to the products we sell to our dealerships for retail sale, we also sell vehicles to our dealerships for sale to fleet customers, including commercial fleet customers, daily rental car companies, and governments. We also sell parts and accessories, primarily to our dealerships (which in turn sell these products to retail customers) and to authorized parts distributors (which in turn primarily sell these products to retailers). We also offer extended service contracts. The worldwide automotive industry is affected significantly by general economic conditions over which we have little control. Vehicles are durable goods, and consumers have latitude in determining whether and when to replace an existing vehicle. The decision whether to purchase a vehicle may be affected significantly by slowing economic growth, geopolitical events, and other factors (including the cost of purchasing and operating cars and trucks and the availability and cost of financing and fuel). As we have seen in the United States and Europe, in particular, the number of cars and trucks sold may vary substantially from year to year. Further, the automotive industry is a highly competitive business that has a wide and growing variety of product offerings from a growing number of manufacturers. Our wholesale unit volumes vary with the level of total industry demand and our share of that industry demand. Our wholesale unit volumes also are influenced by the level of dealer inventory. Our share is influenced by how our products are perceived in comparison to those offered by other manufacturers based on many factors, including price, quality, styling, reliability, safety, fuel efficiency, functionality, and reputation. Our share also is affected by the timing and frequency of new model introductions. Our ability to satisfy changing consumer preferences with respect to type or size of vehicle, as well as design and performance characteristics, affects our sales and earnings significantly. Item 1. Business (Continued) 3 As with other manufacturers, the profitability of our business is affected by many factors, including: • Wholesale unit volumes • Margin of profit on each vehicle sold - which in turn is affected by many factors, such as: Market factors - volume and mix of vehicles and options sold, and net pricing (reflecting, among other factors, incentive programs) Costs of components and raw materials necessary for production of vehicles Costs for customer warranty claims and additional service actions Costs for safety, emissions, and fuel economy technology and equipment • A high proportion of relatively fixed structural costs, so that small changes in wholesale unit volumes can significantly affect overall profitability Our industry has a very competitive pricing environment, driven in part by industry excess capacity, which is concentrated in Europe and Asia but affects other markets because much of this capacity can be redirected to other markets. The decline in the value of the yen during the past four years also has contributed significantly to competitive pressures in many of our markets. For the past several decades, manufacturers typically have given price discounts and other marketing incentives to maintain market share and production levels. A discussion of our strategies to compete in this pricing environment is set forth in the “Overview” section in Item 7. Competitive Position. The worldwide automotive industry consists of many producers, with no single dominant producer. Certain manufacturers, however, account for the major percentage of total sales within particular countries, especially their countries of origin. Key competitors with global presence include Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, General Motors Company, Honda Motor Company, Hyundai-Kia Automotive Group, PSA Peugeot Citroen, Renault-Nissan B.V., Suzuki Motor Corporation, Toyota Motor Corporation, and Volkswagen AG Group. Seasonality. We generally record the sale of a vehicle (and recognize revenue) when it is produced and shipped or delivered to our customer (i.e., the dealership). See the “Overview” section in Item 7 for additional discussion of revenue recognition practices. We manage our vehicle production schedule based on a number of factors, including retail sales (i.e., units sold by our dealerships to their customers at retail) and dealer stock levels (i.e., the number of units held in inventory by our dealerships for sale to their customers). Historically, we have experienced some seasonal fluctuation in the business, with production in many markets tending to be higher in the first half of the year to meet demand in the spring and summer (typically the strongest sales months of the year). Backlog Orders. We generally produce and ship our products on average within approximately 20 days after an order is deemed to become firm. Therefore, no significant amount of backlog orders accumulates during any period. Raw Materials. We purchase a wide variety of raw materials from numerous suppliers around the world for use in production of our vehicles. These materials include base metals (e.g., steel, iron castings, and aluminum), precious metals (e.g., palladium), energy (e.g., natural gas), and plastics/resins (e.g., polypropylene). We believe we have adequate supplies or sources of availability of raw materials necessary to meet our needs. There always are risks and uncertainties with respect to the supply of raw materials, however, which could impact availability in sufficient quantities to meet our needs. See the “Overview” section of Item 7 for a discussion of commodity and energy price trends, and “Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk” (“Item 7A”) for a discussion of commodity price risks. Intellectual Property. We own or hold licenses to use numerous patents, copyrights, and trademarks on a global basis. Our policy is to protect our competitive position by, among other methods, filing U.S. and international patent applications to protect technology and improvements that we consider important to the development of our business. We have generated a large number of patents, and expect this portfolio to continue to grow as we actively pursue additional technological innovation. We have approximately 48,000 active patents and pending patent applications globally, with an average age for patents in our active patent portfolio of just over five years. In addition to this intellectual property, we also rely on our proprietary knowledge and ongoing technological innovation to develop and maintain our competitive position. Although we believe these patents, patent applications, and know-how, in the aggregate, are important to the conduct of our business, and we obtain licenses to use certain intellectual property owned by others, none is individually considered material to our business. We also own numerous trademarks and service marks that contribute to the identity and recognition of our Company and its products and services globally. Certain of these marks are integral to the conduc Item 1. Business (Continued) 4 Warranty Coverage, Field Service Actions, and Customer Satisfaction Actions. We provide warranties on vehicles we sell. Warranties are offered for specific periods of time and/or mileage, and vary depending upon the type of product and the geographic location of its sale. Pursuant to these warranties, we will repair, replace, or adjust all parts on a vehicle that are defective in factory-supplied materials or workmanship during the specified warranty period. In addition to the costs associated with this warranty coverage provided on our vehicles, we also incur costs as a result of field service actions (i.e., safety recalls, emission recalls, and other product campaigns), and for customer satisfaction actions. For additional information regarding warranty and related costs, see “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 and Note 24 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. Industry Volume, Market Share, and Wholesales Our industry volume, market share, and wholesale unit volume in each region and in certain key markets within each region during the past three years were as follows: Industry Volume (a) Market Share (b) Wholesales (c) (in millions of units) (as a percentage) (in thousands of units) 2014 2015 2016 2014 2015 2016 2014 2015 2016 United States 16.8 17.8 17.9 14.7% 14.7% 14.6% 2,457 2,677 2,588 Canada 1.9 1.9 2.0 15.5 14.4 15.4 288 285 313 Mexico 1.2 1.4 1.6 6.9 6.4 6.2 77 93 103 North America 20.2 21.5 21.8 14.2 14.0 13.9 2,842 3,073 3,019 Brazil 3.5 2.6 2.1 9.4% 10.4% 9.2% 320 250 182 Argentina 0.7 0.6 0.7 14.1 14.9 13.6 94 94 101 South America 5.3 4.2 3.7 8.9 9.6 8.8 463 381 325 United Kingdom 2.8 3.1 3.1 14.4% 14.3% 14.0% 425 447 428 Germany 3.4 3.5 3.7 7.1 7.3 7.6 237 261 283 Russia 2.5 1.6 1.5 2.6 2.4 2.9 57 38 45 Turkey 0.8 1.0 1.0 11.7 12.6 11.4 91 128 116 Europe 18.6 19.2 20.1 7.2 7.7 7.7 1,387 1,530 1,539 Middle East & Africa 4.3 4.3 3.6 4.6% 4.4% 4.5% 192 187 161 China 24.0 23.5 26.4 4.5% 4.8% 4.8% 1,116 1,160 1,267 Australia 1.1 1.2 1.2 7.2 6.1 6.9 80 71 82 India 3.2 3.5 3.7 2.4 2.1 2.4 77 78 86 ASEAN (d) 3.2 3.1 3.1 3.1 3.3 3.7 94 94 115 Asia Pacific (e) 39.7 39.1 42.1 3.5 3.6 3.8 1,439 1,464 1,607 Global 88.1 88.2 91.4 7.1% 7.4% 7.3% N/A N/A N/A Total Company N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 6,323 6,635 6,651 ______________ (a) Industry volume is an internal estimate based on publicly-available data collected from various government, private, and public sources around the globe and is based, in part, on estimated vehicle registrations; includes medium and heavy trucks. (b) Market share represents reported retail sales of our brands as a percent of total industry volume in the relevant market or region. Market share is based, in part, on estimated vehicle registrations; includes medium and heavy trucks. (c) Wholesale unit volume includes sales of medium and heavy trucks. Wholesale unit volume includes all Ford and Lincoln badged units (whether produced by Ford or by an unconsolidated affiliate) that are sold to dealerships, units manufactured by Ford that are sold to other manufacturers, units distributed for other manufacturers, and local brand units produced by our unconsolidated Chinese joint venture Jiangling Motors Corporation, Ltd. (“JMC”) that are sold to dealerships. Vehicles sold to daily rental car companies that are subject to a guaranteed repurchase option (i.e., rental repurchase), as well as other sales of finished vehicles for which the recognition of revenue is deferred (e.g., consignments), also are included in wholesale unit volume. Revenue from certain vehicles in wholesale unit volume (specifically, Ford badged vehicles produced and distributed by our unconsolidated affiliates, as well as JMC brand vehicles) are not included in our revenue. (d) ASEAN includes Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam, and Malaysia. (e) Asia Pacific market share includes Ford brand and JMC brand vehicles produced and sold by our unconsolidated affiliates. Item 1. Business (Continued) 5 FINANCIAL SERVICES SEGMENT Ford Motor Credit Company LLC Our wholly-owned subsidiary Ford Credit offers a wide variety of automotive financing products to and through automotive dealers throughout the world. The predominant share of Ford Credit’s business consists of financing our vehicles and supporting our dealers. Ford Credit earns its revenue primarily from payments made under retail installment sale and lease contracts that it originates and purchases; interest rate supplements and other support payments from us and our subsidiaries; and payments made under dealer financing programs. As a result of these financing activities, Ford Credit has a large portfolio of finance receivables and operating leases which it classifies into two portfolios— “consumer” and “non-consumer.” Finance receivables and operating leases in the consumer portfolio include products offered to individuals and businesses that finance the acquisition of our vehicles from dealers for personal and commercial use. Retail financing includes retail installment sale contracts for new and used vehicles and direct financing leases for new vehicles to retail and commercial customers including leasing companies, government entities, daily rental companies, and fleet customers. Finance receivables in the non-consumer portfolio include products offered to automotive dealers. Ford Credit makes wholesale loans to dealers to finance the purchase of vehicle inventory (i.e., floorplan financing), as well as loans to dealers to finance working capital and improvements to dealership facilities, finance the purchase of dealership real estate, and finance other dealer vehicle programs. Ford Credit also purchases receivables generated by us and our subsidiaries, primarily related to the sale of parts and accessories to dealers, Ford-related loans, and certain used vehicles from daily rental fleet companies. Ford Credit does business in the United States and Canada through business centers. Outside of the United States, Europe is Ford Credit’s largest operation. Ford Credit’s European operations are managed through its United Kingdombased subsidiary, FCE Bank plc (“FCE”). Within Europe, FCE’s largest markets are the United Kingdom and Germany, representing 65% of FCE’s finance receivables and operating leases at year-end 2016. The following table shows Ford Credit’s financing shares of new Ford and Lincoln vehicle retail sales in the United States and new Ford vehicles sold in Europe, as well as its wholesale financing shares of new Ford and Lincoln vehicles acquired by dealers in the United States (excluding fleet) and new Ford vehicles acquired by dealers in Europe: Years Ended December 31, 2014 2015 2016 United States - Financing Share Retail installment and lease share of Ford retail sales 63% 65% 56% Wholesale 77 76 76 Europe - Financing Share Retail installment and lease share of total Ford sales 36% 37% 37% Wholesale 98 98 98 See Item 7 and Notes 6, 7, and 8 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for a detailed discussion of Ford Credit’s receivables, credit losses, allowance for credit losses, loss-to-receivables ratios, funding sources, and funding strategies. See Item 7A for discussion of how Ford Credit manages its financial market risks. We routinely sponsor special retail and lease incentives to dealers’ customers who choose to finance or lease our vehicles from Ford Credit. In order to compensate Ford Credit for the lower interest or lease payments offered to the retail customer, we pay the value of the incentive directly to Ford Credit when it originates the retail finance or lease contract. These programs increase Ford Credit’s financing volume and share. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for information about our accounting for these programs. We have an Amended and Restated Relationship Agreement with Ford Credit, pursuant to which, if Ford Credit’s managed leverage for a calendar quarter were to be higher than 11.5:1 (as reported in its most recent periodic report), Ford Credit could require us to make or cause to be made a capital contribution to it in an amount sufficient to have caused such managed leverage to have been 11.5:1. No capital contributions have been made pursuant to this agreement. The agreement also allocates to Ford Credit $3 billion of commitments under our corporate credit facility. In a separate agreement with FCE, Ford Credit also has agreed to maintain FCE’s net worth in excess of $500 million; no payments have been made pursuant to that agreement. Item 1. Business (Continued) 6 GOVERNMENTAL STANDARDS Many governmental standards and regulations relating to safety, fuel economy, emissions control, noise control, vehicle recycling, substances of concern, vehicle damage, and theft prevention are applicable to new motor vehicles, engines, and equipment manufactured for sale in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere. In addition, manufacturing and other automotive assembly facilities in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere are subject to stringent standards regulating air emissions, water discharges, and the handling and disposal of hazardous substances. The most significant of the standards and regulations affecting us are discussed below: Vehicle Emissions Control U.S. Requirements – Federal and California Emission Standards. The federal Clean Air Act imposes stringent limits on the amount of regulated pollutants that lawfully may be emitted by new vehicles and engines produced for sale in the United States. In 2014, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) finalized new “Tier 3” regulations that phase in increasingly stringent motor vehicle emission standards beginning with the 2017 model year. Pursuant to the Clean Air Act, California may establish its own vehicle emission standards, which can then be adopted by other states. The California Air Resources Board (“CARB”) has adopted “LEV III” standards, which took effect with the 2015 model year and impose increasingly stringent tailpipe and evaporative emissions requirements for light and medium duty vehicles. Thirteen states, primarily located in the Northeast and Northwest, have adopted the LEV III standards. Compliance with both the Tier 3 and LEV III standards could be challenging. Both federal and California regulations require motor vehicles to be equipped with on-board diagnostic (“OBD”) systems that monitor emission-related systems and components. As OBD requirements become more complex and challenging over time, they could lead to increased vehicle recalls and warranty costs. Compliance with automobile emission standards depends in part on the widespread availability of high-quality and consistent automotive fuels that the vehicles were designed to use. Fuel variables that can affect vehicle emissions include ethanol content, octane ratings, and the use of metallic-based fuel additives, among other things. There are various ongoing regulatory and judicial proceedings related to fuel quality at the national and state level, and the outcome of these proceedings could affect vehicle manufacturers’ warranty costs as well as their ability to comply with vehicle emission standards. The California vehicle emissions program also includes requirements for manufacturers to produce and deliver for sale zero-emission vehicles (“ZEVs”). The current ZEV regulations mandate substantial annual increases in the production and sale of battery-electric, fuel cell, and plug-in hybrid vehicles, particularly for the 2018–2025 model years. By the 2025 model year, approximately 15% of a manufacturer’s total California sales volume will need to be made up of such vehicles. Compliance with ZEV rules could have a substantial adverse effect on our sales volumes and profits. We are concerned that the market and infrastructure in California may not support the large volume of advanced-technology vehicles that manufacturers will be required to produce, especially if gasoline prices remain relatively low. We also are concerned about enforcement of the ZEV mandate in other states that have adopted California’s ZEV program, where the existence of a market for such vehicles is even less certain. CARB conducts periodic reviews of its upcoming ZEV requirements, taking into account factors such as technology developments and market acceptance. Ford and the industry will be active participants in such reviews, with the goal of ensuring that ZEV requirements are feasible and not excessively burdensome. European Requirements. European Union (“EU”) directives and related legislation limit the amount of regulated pollutants that may be emitted by new motor vehicles and engines sold in the EU. Stringent new Stage 6 emission standards took effect for vehicle registrations starting in September 2014, with a second phase beginning in September 2017. These standards will drive the need for additional diesel exhaust after-treatment, which will add cost and potentially impact the diesel CO2 advantage. The European Commission has also proposed new Real Driving Emission (“RDE”) rules, which will require manufacturers to conduct on-road emission tests using portable emission analyzers. These on-road emission tests will complement the laboratory-based tests. During the initial phase, which started in January 2016, the RDE tests are used for monitoring purposes. Beginning in September 2017, manufacturers will have to reduce the divergence between the regulatory limit that is tested in laboratory conditions and the values of RDE tests (“conformity factors”). The additional costs associated with conducting the RDE tests and complying with the conformity factors are expected to be significant. Europe is in process of drafting the RDE in-use surveillance rules with proposals to allow third parties to conduct testing and to define a process to challenge the product compliance with Authorities. On a longer term approach, the WVTA (Whole Vehicle Type Approval) Regulations are being adapted to cover market surveillance, which is further expected to increase testing by Authorities across Europe from 2020+. Item 1. Business (Continued) 7 Other National Requirements. Many countries, in an effort to address air quality concerns, are adopting previous versions of European or United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (“UN-ECE”) mobile source emission regulations. Some countries have adopted more advanced regulations based on the most recent version of European or U.S. regulations; for example, China adopted emission regulations based on European Stage VI emission standards and U.S. evaporative emissions and on-board diagnostic requirements. Korea and Taiwan have adopted very stringent U.S.- based standards for gasoline vehicles and European-based standards for diesel vehicles. Although these countries have adopted regulations based on UN-ECE or U.S. standards, there may be some unique testing provisions that require emission-control systems to be redesigned for these markets. Canadian criteria emissions regulations are aligned with U.S. Tier 2 requirements. In July 2015, the Canadian federal government amended the On-Road Vehicle and Engine Emission Regulations and the Sulphur in Gasoline Regulations to align Canadian emission standards with the U.S. Tier 3 regulations discussed above. In October 2016, the Canadian Province of Quebec passed legislation enabling regulation of a ZEV mandate. Regulations are still under development but Quebec has signaled that they plan to follow California and Northeast States’ regulations. Not all countries have adopted appropriate fuel quality standards to accompany the stringent emission standards adopted. This could lead to compliance problems, particularly if on-board diagnostic or in-use surveillance requirements are implemented. Brazil and Chile have introduced stringent emission and on-board diagnostic standards based on the European Stage 5 standards for light duty vehicles and Stage V standards for heavy duty vehicles. In Brazil, all light duty vehicles are required to meet U.S.-based Proconve L6 standards and more stringent on-board diagnostic standards for diesel light duty vehicles were introduced in 2017. Argentina is phasing in European Stage 5 standards for all new light duty vehicle registrations by 2017 and European Stage V standards for heavy duty vehicles by 2018. Global Developments. Since September 2015, the EPA and CARB have pursued enforcement actions against a major competitor in connection with its use of “defeat devices” in hundreds of thousands of light-duty diesel vehicles. These actions have resulted in settlements involving billions of dollars for environmental remediation and civil penalties, as well as indictments of several employees on charges of committing federal crimes. The competitor continues to face various class action suits, as well as numerous claims and investigations by various U.S. states and other nations. Defeat devices are elements of design (typically embedded in software) that improperly cause the emission control system to function less effectively during normal on-road driving than during an official laboratory emissions test, without justification. They are prohibited by law in many jurisdictions, including the United States and Europe. We do not use defeat devices in our vehicles. The investigations by EPA and CARB of our competitor have led to increased scrutiny of automakers’ emission testing by regulators around the world. EPA began carrying out additional non-standard tests as part of its vehicle certification program, following an announcement in September 2015. The EU accelerated efforts to finalize its RDE testing program as described above. In 2016, several European countries, including France and Germany, conducted non-standard emission tests and published the results. In some cases, this supplemental testing has triggered investigations of other manufacturers for possible defeat devices. Testing is expected to continue on an ongoing basis. Vehicle Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Standards U.S. Requirements – Light Duty Vehicles. Federal law requires that light duty vehicles meet minimum corporate average fuel economy (“CAFE”) standards set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (“NHTSA”). Manufacturers are subject to substantial civil penalties if they fail to meet the CAFE standard in any model year, after taking into account all available credits for the preceding three model years and expected credits for the five succeeding model years. The law requires NHTSA to promulgate and enforce separate CAFE standards applicable to each manufacturer’s fleet of domestic passenger cars, imported passenger cars, and light duty trucks. EPA also regulates vehicle greenhouse gas (“GHG”) emissions under the Clean Air Act. Because the vast majority of GHGs emitted by a vehicle are the result of fuel combustion, GHG emission standards effectively are fuel economy standards. Thus, it is necessary for NHTSA and EPA to coordinate with each other on their fuel economy and GHG standards, respectively, to avoid potential inconsistencies. In 2010, EPA and NHTSA jointly promulgated regulations establishing the “One National Program” of CAFE and GHG regulations for light duty vehicles for the 2012-2016 model years. In 2012, EPA and NHTSA jointly promulgated regulations extending the One National Program framework through the 2025 model year. These rules require Item 1. Business (Continued) 8 manufacturers to achieve, across the industry, a light duty fleet average fuel economy of approximately 35.5 mpg by the 2016 model year, 45 mpg by the 2021 model year, and 51.4 mpg by the 2025 model year. Each manufacturer’s specific task depends on the mix of vehicles it sells. The rules include the opportunity for manufacturers to earn credits for technologies that achieve real-world CO2 reductions, and fuel economy improvements that are not captured by the EPA fuel economy test procedures. Manufacturers also can earn credits for GHG reductions not specifically tied to fuel economy, such as improvements in air conditioning systems. The One National Program standards become increasingly stringent over time, and they will be difficult to meet if fuel prices remain relatively low and market conditions do not drive consumers to purchase electric vehicles and other highly fuel-efficient vehicles in large numbers. We are concerned about the commercial feasibility of meeting future model year GHG and CAFE standards, particularly the 2022-2025 standards, because of the many unknowns regarding technology development, market conditions, and other factors so far into the future. The One National Program rules provided for a midterm evaluation process under which, by April 2018, EPA and NHTSA would re-evaluate their standards for model years 2022-2025 in order to ensure that those standards are feasible and optimal in light of intervening events. Shortly before President Obama left office in January 2017, EPA announced an accelerated decision to maintain the GHG standards originally set for those model years. NHTSA is continuing to conduct its evaluation with respect to the model year 2022-2025 standards. It remains to be seen whether the EPA determination will be reconsidered under President Trump’s administration, and whether the EPA and NHTSA determinations will ultimately be harmonized with each other. If the agencies seek to impose and enforce fuel economy and GHG standards that are misaligned with market conditions, we likely would be forced to take various actions that could have substantial adverse effects on our sales volume and profits. Such actions likely would include restricting offerings of selected engines and popular options; increasing market support programs for our most fuel-efficient cars and light trucks; and ultimately curtailing the production and sale of certain vehicles such as high-performance cars, utilities, and/or full-size light trucks, in order to maintain compliance. California has asserted the right to regulate motor vehicle GHG emissions, and other states have asserted the right to adopt the California standards. With the adoption of the federal One National Program standards discussed above, California and the other states have agreed that compliance with the federal program would satisfy compliance with any purported state GHG requirements for the 2012–2025 model years. This avoids a patchwork of potentially conflicting federal and state GHG standards. Should California and other states ever renew their efforts to enforce state-specific motor vehicle GHG rules, this would impose significant costs on automotive manufacturers. U.S. Requirements – Heavy Duty Vehicles. EPA and NHTSA have jointly promulgated GHG and fuel economy standards on heavy duty vehicles (generally, vehicles over 8,500 pounds gross vehicle weight rating). In our case, the standards primarily affect our heavy duty pickup trucks and vans, plus vocational vehicles such as shuttle buses and delivery trucks. In 2016, EPA and NHTSA finalized GHG and fuel economy standards for these vehicles, covering model years 2019–2027. As the heavy-duty standards increase in stringency, it may become more difficult to comply while continuing to offer a full lineup of heavy duty trucks. European Requirements. In December 2008, the EU approved regulation of passenger car CO2 emissions beginning in 2012 that limits the industry fleet average to a maximum of 130 grams per kilometer (“g/km”), using a sliding scale based on vehicle weight. This regulation provides different targets for each manufacturer based on the respective average vehicle weight for its fleet of vehicles. Limited credits are available for CO2 off-cycle actions (“eco-innovations”), certain alternative fuels, and vehicles with CO2 emissions below 50 g/km. A penalty system will apply for manufacturers failing to meet targets. Pooling agreements between different manufacturers are possible, although it is not clear that these will be of much practical benefit under the regulations. Starting in 2020, an industry target of 95 g/km has been set, for which 95% of a manufacturer’s fleet has to comply; by 2021, 100% of a manufacturer’s fleet has to comply. Other nonEU European countries are likely to follow with similar regulations. For example, Switzerland has introduced similar rules, which began phasing-in starting in July 2012 with the same targets (which include a 2020 target of 95 g/km, with conditions still to be defined), although the industry average emission target is significantly higher. We face the risk of advance premium payment requirements if, for example, unexpected market fluctuation within a quarter negatively impact our average fleet performance. In separate legislation, “complementary measures” have been mandated, including requirements related to fuel economy indicators, and more-efficient low-CO2 mobile air conditioning systems. The EU Commission, Council and Parliament have approved a target for commercial light duty vehicles to be at an industry average of 175 g/km (with phase-in from 2014–2017), and 147 g/km in 2020. It is likely that other European countries, will implement similar rules Item 1. Business (Continued) 9 but under even more difficult conditions. For instance, Switzerland will implement the same 147 g/km target in 2020 but under more difficult conditions. This regulation also provides different targets for each manufacturer based on its respective average vehicle weight in its fleet of vehicles. The final mass and CO2 requirements for “multi-stage vehicles” (e.g., our Transit chassis cabs) are fully allocated to the base manufacturer (e.g., Ford) so that the base manufacturer is fully responsible for the CO2 performance of the final up-fitted vehicles. The EU proposal also includes a penalty system, “super-credits” for vehicles below 50 g/km, and limited credits for CO2 off-cycle eco-innovations, pooling, etc., similar to the passenger car CO2 regulation. The United Nations developed a new technical regulation for passenger car emissions and CO2. This new world light duty test procedure (“WLTP”) is focused primarily on better aligning laboratory CO2 and fuel consumption figures with customer-reported figures. The introduction of WLTP in Europe is likely to require updates to CO2 labeling as early as 2018 and will increase certain consumer label values, thereby impacting taxes in countries with a CO2 tax scheme. Costs associated with new or incremental testing for WLTP could be significant. The European Commission requires mandatory WLTP testing for regulated emissions and CO2 starting in September 2017. The European Commission has assured comparable stringency to the existing fleet average rules for each automobile manufacturer if the 2021 fleet average targets are required to be measured on WLTP instead of under the current European New European Driving Cycle (“NEDC”) requirements. The legislative framework and process for the target translation is currently under development. The European Commission confirmed in October 2016 that there would be a delay in the introduction of a timetable for a post-2020 CO2 proposal. The proposal is now expected to be released during the second half of 2017. Some European countries have implemented or are considering other initiatives for reducing CO2 vehicle emissions, including fiscal measures and CO2 labeling. For example, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Spain, Portugal, and the Netherlands, among others, have introduced taxation based on CO2 emissions. The EU CO2 requirements are likely to trigger further measures. To limit GHG emissions, the EU directive on mobile air conditioning currently requires the replacement of the current refrigerant with a lower “global warming potential” refrigerant for new vehicle types, and for all newly registered vehicles starting in January 2017. A refrigerant change adds considerable costs along the whole manufacturing chain. Other National Requirements. The Canadian federal government has regulated vehicle GHG emissions under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, beginning with the 2011 model year. In October 2014, the Canadian federal government published the final changes to the regulation for light duty vehicles, which maintain alignment with U.S. EPA vehicle GHG standards for the 2017–2025 model years. The final regulation for 2014–2018 heavy duty vehicles was published in February 2013. In October 2014, the Canadian federal government published the Notice of Intent to regulate heavy duty vehicles and engines for model year 2019 and beyond, which tracks U.S. EPA standards. Mexico adopted fuel economy/CO2 standards, based on the U.S. One National Program framework, that took effect in 2014. Many Asia Pacific countries (such as Australia, China, India, South Korea, Taiwan, and Vietnam) are developing or enforcing fuel efficiency or labeling targets. For example, South Korea has set fuel efficiency targets for 2020, with incentives for early adoption. China published standards for Stage IV fuel efficiency targets for 2016–2020. The fuel efficiency targets will impact the cost of vehicle technology in the future. In South America, Brazil introduced a voluntary vehicle energy-efficiency labeling program, indicating fuel consumption rates for all light-duty vehicles. Brazil has required inclusion of emission classification on fuel economy labels since January 2016. Brazil also published a new automotive regime establishing a minimum absolute CAFE value as a function of Fleet Corporate Average Mass for 2017 light duty vehicles with a spark ignition engine in order to qualify for industrialized products tax reduction. Additional tax reductions are available if further fuel efficiency improvements are achieved. A severe penalty system will apply to qualified manufacturers failing to meet fuel efficiency requirements for the 2013–2017 sales period. Brazil reduced import tax on electric and hybrid cars. The tax rate, which was 35%, will vary from zero to 7%, depending on a vehicle’s energy efficiency. Discussion on new fuel efficiency requirements has started. Chile introduced a tax based on urban fuel consumption and NOx emission for light and medium vehicles beginning in late 2014. In general, fuel efficiency targets may impact the cost of technology of our models in the future. In the Middle East, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia introduced new light duty vehicle fuel economy standards, which are patterned after the U.S. CAFE standard structure, with fuel economy targets following the design of the U.S. 2012–2016 fuel economy standards. The standards became effective on January 1, 2016 and will be fully phased in by the end of 2017. Item 1. Business (Continued) 10 Vehicle Safety U.S. Requirements. The National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (the “Safety Act”) regulates vehicles and vehicle equipment in two primary ways. First, the Safety Act prohibits the sale in the United States of any new vehicle or equipment that does not conform to applicable vehicle safety standards established by NHTSA. Meeting or exceeding many safety standards is costly, in part because the standards tend to conflict with the need to reduce vehicle weight in order to meet emission and fuel economy standards. Second, the Safety Act requires that defects related to motor vehicle safety be remedied through safety recall campaigns. A manufacturer is obligated to recall vehicles if it determines the vehicles do not comply with a safety standard. Should we or NHTSA determine that either a safety defect or noncompliance issue exists with respect to any of our vehicles, the cost of such recall campaigns could be substantial. Other National Requirements. The EU and many countries have established vehicle safety standards and regulations, and are likely to adopt additional or more stringent requirements in the future. The European General Safety Regulation introduced United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (“UN-ECE”) regulations, which will be required for the European Type Approval process. EU regulators also are focusing on active safety features such as lane departure warning systems, electronic stability control, and automatic brake assist. Globally, governments generally have been adopting UN-ECE based regulations with minor variations to address local concerns. Any difference between North American and UN-ECE based regulations can add complexity and costs to the development of global platform vehicles, and we continue to support efforts to harmonize regulations to reduce vehicle design complexity while providing a common level of safety performance; several recently launched bilateral negotiations on free trade can potentially contribute to this goal. New safety and recall requirements in China, India, and Gulf Cooperation Council countries also may add substantial costs and complexity to our global recall practice. In South America, additional safety requirements are being introduced or proposed in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, and Uruguay, influenced by The New Car Assessment Program for Latin America and the Caribbean (“Latin NCAP”), which may be a driver for similar actions in other countries. In Canada, regulatory requirements are currently aligned with U.S. regulations. However, recent amendments to the Canadian Motor Vehicle Safety Act have introduced broad powers to the Minister of Transport to order manufacturers to submit a notice of defect or non-compliance when the Minister considers it would be in the interest of safety. New Car Assessment Programs. Organizations around the globe rate and compare motor vehicles in New Car Assessment Programs (“NCAPs”) to provide consumers with additional information about the safety of new vehicles. NCAPs use crash tests and other evaluations that are different than what is required by applicable regulations, and use stars to rate vehicle safety, with five stars awarded for the highest rating and one for the lowest. Achieving high NCAP ratings can add complexity and cost to vehicles. ENGINEERING, RESEARCH, AND DEVELOPMENT We engage in engineering, research, and development primarily to improve the performance (including fuel efficiency), safety, and customer satisfaction of our products, and to develop new products and services (including for emerging opportunities). Engineering, research, and development expenses for 2014, 2015, and 2016 were $6.7 billion, $6.7 billion, and $7.3 billion, respectively. ITEM 1A. Risk Factors. We have listed below (not necessarily in order of importance or probability of occurrence) the most significant risk factors applicable to us: Decline in industry sales volume, particularly in the United States, Europe, or China, due to financial crisis, recession, geopolitical events, or other factors. Because we, like other manufacturers, have a high proportion of relatively fixed structural costs, relatively small changes in industry sales volume can have a substantial effect on our cash flow and profitability. If industry vehicle sales were to decline to levels significantly below our planning assumption, particularly in the United States, Europe, or China, due to financial crisis, recession, geopolitical events, or other factors, the decline could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flow. For discussion of economic trends, see the “Overview” section of Item 7. Lower-than-anticipated market acceptance of Ford’s new or existing products or services, or failure to achieve expected growth. Although we conduct extensive market research before launching new or refreshed vehicles and introducing new services, many factors both within and outside our control affect the success of new or existing products and services in the marketplace. Offering vehicles and services that customers want and value can mitigate the risks of increasing price competition and declining demand, but products and services that are perceived to be less desirable (whether in terms of price, quality, styling, safety, overall value, fuel efficiency, or other attributes) can exacerbate these risks. With increased consumer interconnectedness through the internet, social media, and other media, mere allegations relating to quality, safety, fuel efficiency, corporate social responsibility, or other key attributes can negatively impact our reputation or market acceptance of our products or services, even where such allegations prove to be inaccurate or unfounded. Further, our ability to successfully grow through investments in the area of emerging opportunities depends on many factors, including advancements in technology, regulatory changes, and other factors that are difficult to predict, that may significantly affect the future of electrification, autonomy, and mobility. Market shift away from sales of larger, more profitable vehicles beyond Ford’s current planning assumption, particularly in the United States. A shift in consumer preferences away from larger, more profitable vehicles at levels beyond our current planning assumption—whether because of spiking fuel prices, a decline in the construction industry, government actions or incentives, or other reasons—could result in an immediate and substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Continued or increased price competition resulting from industry excess capacity, currency fluctuations, or other factors. The global automotive industry is intensely competitive, with manufacturing capacity far exceeding current demand. According to the December 2016 report issued by IHS Automotive, the global automotive industry is estimated to have had excess capacity of about 32 million units in 2016. Industry overcapacity has resulted in many manufacturers offering marketing incentives on vehicles in an attempt to maintain and grow market share; these incentives historically have included a combination of subsidized financing or leasing programs, price rebates, and other incentives. As a result, we are not necessarily able to set our prices to offset higher costs of marketing incentives, commodity or other cost increases, or the impact of adverse currency fluctuations, including pricing advantages foreign competitors may have because of their weaker home market currencies. Continuation of or increased excess capacity could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 12 Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates. As a resourceintensive manufacturing operation, we are exposed to a variety of market and asset risks, including the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates. We monitor and manage these exposures as an integral part of our overall risk management program, which recognizes the unpredictability of markets and seeks to reduce potentially adverse effects on our business. Nevertheless, changes in currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates cannot always be predicted or hedged. In addition, because of intense price competition and our high level of fixed costs, we may not be able to address such changes even if foreseeable. As a result, substantial unfavorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, or interest rates could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. See “Overview” to Item 7 and Item 7A for additional discussion of currency, commodity price, and interest rate risks. Adverse effects resulting from economic, geopolitical, protectionist trade policies, or other events. With the increasing interconnectedness of global economic and financial systems, a financial crisis, natural disaster, geopolitical crisis, or other significant event in one area of the world can have an immediate and material adverse impact on markets around the world. Concerns persist regarding the overall stability of the European Union, given the diverse economic and political circumstances of individual European currency area (“euro area”) countries. These concerns have been exacerbated by Brexit, which, among other things, has resulted in a weaker sterling versus U.S. dollar and euro. We have a sterling revenue exposure and a euro cost exposure; a sustained weakening of sterling against euro may have an adverse effect on our profitability. Further, the United Kingdom may be at risk of losing access to free trade agreements for goods and services with the European Union and other countries, which may result in increased tariffs on U.K. imports and exports that could have an adverse effect on our profitability. FCE Bank plc (“FCE”), our subsidiary, is a bank authorized by the U.K. government to carry on a range of regulated activities within the United Kingdom and through a branch network in 11 other European countries through a passporting system, which allows it to establish or provide its services in the EU27 without further authorization requirements. If passporting arrangements cease to be effective as a result of Brexit, FCE could be required to reconsider its structure or seek additional authorizations to continue to do business in the EU27, which may be timeconsuming and costly. The economic and policy uncertainty on-going in the euro area highlights potential longer-term risks regarding its sustainability. This uncertainty could cause financial and capital markets within and outside Europe to constrict, thereby negatively impacting our ability to finance our business or, if a country within the euro area were to default on its debt or withdraw from the euro currency, or-—in a more extreme circumstance—the euro currency were to be dissolved entirely, the impact on markets around the world, and on Ford’s global business, could be immediate and significant. In addition, we have operations in various markets with volatile economic or political environments and are pursuing growth opportunities in a number of newly developed and emerging markets. These investments may expose us to heightened risks of economic, geopolitical, or other events, including governmental takeover (i.e., nationalization) of our manufacturing facilities or intellectual property, restrictive exchange or import controls, disruption of operations as a result of systemic political or economic instability, outbreak of war or expansion of hostilities, and acts of terrorism, each of which could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Further, the U.S. government, other governments, and international organizations could impose additional sanctions that could restrict us from doing business directly or indirectly in or with certain countries or parties, which could include affiliates. Work stoppages at Ford or supplier facilities or other limitations on production (whether as a result of labor disputes, natural or man-made disasters, tight credit markets or other financial distress, production constraints or difficulties, or other factors). A work stoppage or other limitation on production could occur at Ford or supplier facilities for any number of reasons, including as a result of disputes under existing collective bargaining agreements with labor unions or in connection with negotiation of new collective bargaining agreements, or as a result of supplier financial distress or other production constraints or difficulties, or for other reasons. A work stoppage or other limitations on production at Ford or supplier facilities for any reason (including but not limited to labor disputes, natural or man-made disasters, tight credit markets or other financial distress, or production constraints or difficulties) could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 13 Single-source supply of components or materials. Many components used in our vehicles are available only from a single supplier and cannot be re-sourced quickly or inexpensively to another supplier (due to long lead times, new contractual commitments that may be required by another supplier before ramping up to provide the components or materials, etc.). In addition to the general risks described above regarding interruption of supplies, which are exacerbated in the case of single-source suppliers, the exclusive supplier of a key component potentially could exert significant bargaining power over price, quality, warranty claims, or other terms relating to a component. Labor or other constraints on Ford’s ability to maintain competitive cost structure. Substantially all of the hourly employees in our Automotive operations in the United States and Canada are represented by unions and covered by collective bargaining agreements. These agreements provide guaranteed wage and benefit levels throughout the contract term and some degree of income security, subject to certain conditions. As a practical matter, these agreements may restrict our ability to close plants and divest businesses. A substantial number of our employees in other regions are represented by unions or government councils, and legislation or custom promoting retention of manufacturing or other employment in the state, country, or region may constrain as a practical matter our ability to sell or close manufacturing or other facilities. Substantial pension and other postretirement liabilities impairing liquidity or financial condition. We have defined benefit retirement plans in the United States that cover many of our hourly and salaried employees. We also provide pension benefits to non-U.S. employees and retirees, primarily in Europe. In addition, we and certain of our subsidiaries sponsor plans to provide other postretirement benefits (“OPEB”) for retired employees (primarily health care and life insurance benefits). See Note 13 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for more information about these plans. These benefit plans impose significant liabilities on us and could require us to make additional cash contributions, which could impair our liquidity. If our cash flows and capital resources were insufficient to meet any pension or OPEB obligations, we could be forced to reduce or delay investments and capital expenditures, suspend dividend payments, seek additional capital, or restructure or refinance our indebtedness. Worse-than-assumed economic and demographic experience for pension and other postretirement benefit plans (e.g., discount rates or investment returns). The measurement of our obligations, costs, and liabilities associated with benefits pursuant to our pension and other postretirement benefit plans requires that we estimate the present value of projected future payments to all participants. We use many assumptions in calculating these estimates, including assumptions related to discount rates, investment returns on designated plan assets, and demographic experience (e.g., mortality and retirement rates). We generally remeasure these estimates at each year end, and recognize any gains or losses associated with changes to our plan assets and liabilities in the year incurred. To the extent actual results are less favorable than our assumptions, we may recognize a substantial remeasurement loss in our results. For discussion of our assumptions, see “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 and Note 13 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. Restriction on use of tax attributes from tax law “ownership change.” Section 382 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code restricts the ability of a corporation that undergoes an ownership change to use its tax attributes, including net operating losses and tax credits (“Tax Attributes”). For these purposes, an ownership change occurs if 5 percent shareholders of an issuer’s outstanding common stock, collectively, increase their ownership percentage by more than 50 percentage points over a rolling three-year period. At December 31, 2016, we had Tax Attributes that would offset more than $15 billion of taxable income. In 2015, we renewed for an additional three-year period our tax benefit preservation plan (the “Plan”) to reduce the risk of an ownership change under Section 382. Under the Plan, shares held by any person who acquires, without the approval of our Board of Directors, beneficial ownership of 4.99% or more of our outstanding Common Stock could be subject to significant dilution. Our shareholders approved the renewal at our annual meeting in May 2016. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 14 The discovery of defects in vehicles resulting in delays in new model launches, recall campaigns, or increased warranty costs. Government safety standards require manufacturers to remedy defects related to vehicle safety through safety recall campaigns, and a manufacturer is obligated to recall vehicles if it determines that the vehicles do not comply with a safety standard. NHTSA’s enforcement strategy has shifted to a significant increase in civil penalties levied and the use of consent orders requiring direct oversight by NHTSA of certain manufacturers’ safety processes, a trend that could continue. Should we or government safety regulators determine that a safety or other defect or a noncompliance exists with respect to certain of our vehicles prior to the start of production, the launch of such vehicle could be delayed until such defect is remedied. The costs associated with any protracted delay in new model launches necessary to remedy such defects, or the cost of recall campaigns or warranty costs to remedy such defects in vehicles that have been sold, could be substantial. Such recall and customer satisfaction actions may relate to defective components we receive from suppliers. The cost to complete a recall or customer satisfaction action could be exacerbated to the extent such action relates to a global platform. Furthermore, launch delays or recall actions could adversely affect our reputation or market acceptance of our products as discussed above under “Lower-thananticipated market acceptance of Ford’s new or existing products or services, or failure to achieve expected growth.” Increased safety, emissions, fuel economy, or other regulations resulting in higher costs, cash expenditures, and/or sales restrictions. The worldwide automotive industry is governed by a substantial amount of government regulation, which often differs by state, region, and country. Government regulation has arisen, and proposals for additional regulation are advanced, primarily out of concern for the environment (including concerns about the possibility of global climate change and its impact), vehicle safety, and energy independence. For example, as discussed above under “Item 1. Business - Governmental Standards,” in the United States the CAFE standards for light duty vehicles increase sharply to 51.4 mpg by the 2025 model year; EPA’s parallel CO2 emission regulations impose similar standards. California’s ZEV rules also mandate steep increases in the sale of electric vehicles and other advanced technology vehicles beginning in the 2018 model year. In addition, many governments regulate local product content and/or impose import requirements as a means of creating jobs, protecting domestic producers, and influencing the balance of payments. In recent years, we have made significant changes to our product cycle plan to improve the overall fuel economy of vehicles we produce, thereby reducing their GHG emissions. There are limits on our ability to achieve fuel economy improvements over a given time frame, however, primarily relating to the cost and effectiveness of available technologies, consumer acceptance of new technologies and changes in vehicle mix, willingness of consumers to absorb the additional costs of new technologies, the appropriateness (or lack thereof) of certain technologies for use in particular vehicles, the widespread availability (or lack thereof) of supporting infrastructure for new technologies, and the human, engineering, and financial resources necessary to deploy new technologies across a wide range of products and powertrains in a short time. The current fuel economy, CO2, and ZEV standards will be difficult to meet if fuel prices remain relatively low and market conditions do not drive consumers to purchase electric vehicles and other highly fuel-efficient vehicles in large numbers. The U.S. government has pursued an enforcement action against a major competitor in connection with its alleged use of “defeat devices” in hundreds of thousands of light duty diesel vehicles, collecting billions of dollars for environmental remediation projects and civil penalties. Several of the competitor’s employees have been indicted on charges of committing federal crimes. The competitor also faces various class action suits, as well as numerous claims and investigations by various U.S. states and other nations. The emergence of this issue has led to increased scrutiny of automaker emission testing by regulators around the world, which in turn has triggered investigations of other manufacturers. These events may lead to new regulations, more stringent enforcement programs, requests for field actions, and/or delays in regulatory approvals. The cost to comply with existing government regulations is substantial and additional regulations or changes in consumer preferences that affect vehicle mix could have a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. For more discussion of the impact of such standards on our global business, see the “Governmental Standards” discussion in “Item 1. Business” above. In addition, a number of governments, as well as non-governmental organizations, publicly assess vehicles to their own protocols. The protocols could change aggressively, and any negative perception regarding the performance of our vehicles subjected to such tests could reduce future sales. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 15 Unusual or significant litigation, governmental investigations, or adverse publicity arising out of alleged defects in products, perceived environmental impacts, or otherwise. We spend substantial resources ensuring that we comply with governmental safety regulations, mobile and stationary source emissions regulations, and other standards. Compliance with governmental standards, however, does not necessarily prevent individual or class actions, which can entail significant cost and risk. In certain circumstances, courts may permit tort claims even where our vehicles comply with federal and/or other applicable law. Furthermore, simply responding to actual or threatened litigation or government investigations of our compliance with regulatory standards, whether related to our products or business or commercial relationships, may require significant expenditures of time and other resources. Litigation also is inherently uncertain, and we could experience significant adverse results. In addition, adverse publicity surrounding an allegation may cause significant reputational harm that could have a significant adverse effect on our sales. Adverse effects on results from a decrease in or cessation or clawback of government incentives related to investments. We receive economic benefits from national, state, and local governments in various regions of the world in the form of incentives designed to encourage manufacturers to establish, maintain, or increase investment, workforce, or production. These incentives may take various forms, including grants, loan subsidies, and tax abatements or credits. The impact of these incentives can be significant in a particular market during a reporting period. For example, most of our manufacturing facilities in South America are located in Brazil, where the state or federal governments have historically offered, and continue to offer, significant incentives to manufacturers to encourage capital investment, increase manufacturing production, and create jobs. As a result, the performance of our South American operations has been impacted favorably by government incentives to a substantial extent. In Brazil, however, the federal government has levied assessments against us concerning our calculation of federal incentives we received, and certain states have challenged the grant to us of tax incentives by the state of Bahia, including a constitutional challenge of state incentives that is pending in Brazil’s Supreme Court. A decrease in, expiration without renewal of, or other cessation or clawback of government incentives for any of our business units, as a result of administrative decision or otherwise, could have a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for discussion of our accounting for government incentives, and “Item 3. Legal Proceedings” for a discussion of tax proceedings in Brazil and the potential requirement for us to post collateral. Cybersecurity risks to operational systems, security systems, or infrastructure owned by Ford, Ford Credit, or a third-party vendor or supplier. We are at risk for interruptions, outages, and breaches of: (i) operational systems (including business, financial, accounting, product development, consumer receivables, data processing, or manufacturing processes); (ii) facility security systems; and/or (iii) in-vehicle systems or mobile devices. Such cyber incidents could materially disrupt operational systems; result in loss of trade secrets or other proprietary or competitively sensitive information; compromise personally identifiable information of customers, employees, or others; jeopardize the security of our facilities; and/or affect the performance of in-vehicle systems. A cyber incident could be caused by malicious third parties using sophisticated, targeted methods to circumvent firewalls, encryption, and other security defenses, including hacking, fraud, trickery, or other forms of deception. The techniques used by third parties change frequently and may be difficult to detect for long periods of time. A significant cyber incident could impact production capability, harm our reputation and/or subject us to regulatory actions or litigation. Failure of financial institutions to fulfill commitments under committed credit and liquidity facilities. Under our corporate credit facility), we are able to borrow, repay, and then re-borrow up to $13.4 billion. Certain of our subsidiaries have standby or revolving credit facilities on which they depend for liquidity. If the financial institutions that provide commitments under the corporate credit facility, our subsidiaries’ standby or revolving credit facilities, or other committed credit facilities were to default on their obligation to fund the commitments, these facilities would not be available to us, which could substantially adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition. For discussion of our Credit Agreement, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” in Item 7 and Note 14 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 16 Inability of Ford Credit to access debt, securitization, or derivative markets around the world at competitive rates or in sufficient amounts, due to credit rating downgrades, market volatility, market disruption, regulatory requirements, or other factors. Ford Credit’s ability to obtain unsecured funding at a reasonable cost is dependent on its credit ratings or its perceived creditworthiness. Ford Credit’s ability to obtain securitized funding under its committed asset-backed liquidity programs and certain other asset-backed securitization transactions is subject to having a sufficient amount of assets eligible for these programs, as well as Ford Credit’s ability to obtain appropriate credit ratings and, for certain committed programs, derivatives to manage the interest rate risk. Over time, and particularly in the event of any credit rating downgrades, market volatility, market disruption, or other factors, Ford Credit may reduce the amount of receivables it purchases or originates because of funding constraints. In addition, Ford Credit may be limited in the amount of receivables it purchases or originates in certain countries or regions if the local capital markets, particularly in developing countries, do not exist or are not adequately developed. Similarly, Ford Credit may reduce the amount of receivables it purchases or originates if there is a significant decline in the demand for the types of securities it offers or Ford Credit is unable to obtain derivatives to manage the interest rate risk associated with its securitization transactions. A significant reduction in the amount of receivables Ford Credit purchases or originates would significantly reduce its ongoing profits and could adversely affect its ability to support the sale of Ford vehicles. Higher-than-expected credit losses, lower-than-anticipated residual values, or higher-than-expected return volumes for leased vehicles. Credit risk is the possibility of loss from a customer’s or dealer’s failure to make payments according to contract terms. Credit risk (which is heavily dependent upon economic factors including unemployment, consumer debt service burden, personal income growth, dealer profitability, and used car prices) has a significant impact on Ford Credit’s business. The level of credit losses Ford Credit may experience could exceed its expectations and adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations. In addition, Ford Credit projects expected residual values (including residual value support payments from Ford) and return volumes for the vehicles it leases. Actual proceeds realized by Ford Credit upon the sale of returned leased vehicles at lease termination may be lower than the amount projected, which would reduce the profitability of the lease transaction. Among the factors that can affect the value of returned lease vehicles are the volume of vehicles returned, economic conditions, and quality or perceived quality, safety, fuel efficiency, or reliability of the vehicles. Actual return volumes may be higher than expected and can be influenced by contractual lease-end values relative to auction values, marketing programs for new vehicles, and general economic conditions. Each of these factors, alone or in combination, has the potential to adversely affect Ford Credit’s profitability if actual results were to differ significantly from Ford Credit’s projections. See “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 for additional discussion. Increased competition from banks, financial institutions, or other third parties seeking to increase their share of financing Ford vehicles. No single company is a dominant force in the automotive finance industry. Most of Ford Credit’s competitors in the United States use credit aggregation systems that permit dealers to send, through standardized systems, retail credit applications to multiple finance sources to evaluate financing options offered by these sources. Also, direct on-line or large dealer group financing options provide consumers with alternative finance sources and/or increased pricing transparency. All of these financing alternatives drive greater competition based on financing rates and terms. Competition from such institutions and alternative finance sources could adversely affect Ford Credit’s profitability and the volume of its retail business. In addition, Ford Credit may face increased competition on wholesale financing for Ford dealers. New or increased credit regulations, consumer or data protection regulations, or other regulations resulting in higher costs and/or additional financing restrictions. As a finance company, Ford Credit is highly regulated by governmental authorities in the locations in which it operates, which can impose significant additional costs and/or restrictions on its business. In the United States, for example, Ford Credit’s operations are subject to regulation, supervision, and licensing under various federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including the federal Truth-in-Lending Act, Consumer Leasing Act, Equal Credit Opportunity Act, and Fair Credit Reporting Act. The Dodd-Frank Act directs federal agencies to adopt rules to regulate the consumer finance industry and the capital markets and gives the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (“CFPB”) broad rule-making and enforcement authority for a wide range of consumer financial protection laws that regulate consumer finance businesses, such as Ford Credit’s retail automotive financing business. Exercise of these powers by the CFPB may increase the costs of, impose additional restrictions on, or otherwise adversely affect companies in the automotive finance business. The CFPB has authority to supervise and examine the largest nonbank automotive finance companies, such as Ford Credit, for compliance with consumer financial protection laws. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 17 In some countries outside the United States, some of Ford Credit’s subsidiaries are regulated banking institutions and are required, among other things, to maintain minimum capital and liquidity. In many other locations, governmental authorities require companies to have licenses in order to conduct financing businesses. Compliance with these laws and regulations imposes additional costs on Ford Credit and affects the conduct of its business. Additional regulation could add significant cost or operational constraints that might impair Ford Credit’s profitability. Key Economic Factors and Trends Affecting the Automotive Industry Currency Exchange Rate Volatility. The U.S. Federal Reserve raised its policy interest rate in December 2016, a move which has been accompanied by an upward shift in longer term interest rates since November 2016. The related shifts in capital flows have contributed to downward pressure on both developed and emerging market currencies globally. In some emerging markets, that pressure is aggravated by low commodity prices, high inflation, or unstable policy environments. Additionally, the yen, euro and pound have depreciated as a result of monetary policy easing by the central banks in those markets, as well as ongoing Brexit negotiations in Europe. The weak yen, in particular, adds significant potential downward pressure on vehicle pricing across many markets globally. In most markets, exchange rates are market-determined, and all are impacted by many different macroeconomic and policy factors, and thus likely to remain volatile. However, in some markets, exchange rates are heavily influenced or controlled by governments. Excess Capacity. According to IHS Automotive, an automotive research firm, the estimated automotive industry global production capacity for light vehicles of about 125 million units exceeded global production by about 32 million units in 2016. In North America and Europe, two regions where a significant share of industry revenue is earned, excess capacity as a percent of production was an estimated 7% and 21%, respectively, in 2016. In China, the auto industry also witnessed excess capacity at 48% of production in 2016, as manufacturers compete to capitalize on China’s future market potential. According to production capacity data projected by IHS Automotive, global excess capacity conditions could continue for several years at an average of about 39 million units per year during the period from 2017 to 2021. Pricing Pressure. Excess capacity, coupled with a proliferation of new products being introduced in key segments, will keep pressure on manufacturers’ ability to increase prices. In North America, the industry restructuring of the past few years has allowed manufacturers to better match production with demand, although Japanese and Korean manufacturers also have capacity located outside of the region directed to North America. In the future, Chinese and Indian manufacturers are expected to enter U.S. and European markets, further intensifying competition. Over the long term, intense competition and excess capacity will continue to put downward pressure on inflation-adjusted prices for similarlycontented vehicles in the United States and contribute to a challenging pricing environment for the automotive industry. In Europe, the excess capacity situation was exacerbated by weakening demand and the lack of reductions in existing capacity, such that negative pricing pressure is expected to continue for the foreseeable future. Commodity and Energy Price Changes. The price of oil has increased since late 2016 as oil producing nations agreed to modest output reductions, although the average oil price for the year was below the 2015 level. Other commodity prices have begun to increase as well, with continued volatility likely. Over the longer term, commodity prices are likely to trend higher given expectations for global demand growth. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) 28 Vehicle Profitability. Our financial results depend on the profitability of the vehicles we sell, which may vary significantly by vehicle line. In general, larger vehicles tend to command higher prices and be more profitable than smaller vehicles, both across and within vehicle segments. For example, in North America, our larger, more profitable vehicles had an average contribution margin that was about 135% of our total average contribution margin across all vehicles, whereas our smaller vehicles had significantly lower contribution margins. In addition, government regulations aimed at reducing emissions and increasing fuel efficiency may increase the cost of vehicles by more than the perceived benefit to the consumer. Given the backdrop of excess capacity, these regulations could dampen contribution margins. Trade Policy. To the extent governments in various regions erect or intensify barriers to imports, or implement currency policy that advantages local exporters selling into the global marketplace, there can be a significant negative impact on manufacturers based in markets that promote free trade. While we believe the long-term trend is toward the growth of free trade, we have noted with concern recent developments in a number of regions. In Asia Pacific, for example, the recent dramatic depreciation of the yen significantly reduces the cost of exports into the United States, Europe, and other global markets by Japanese manufacturers. Over a period of time, the emerging weakness of the yen can contribute to other countries pursuing weak currency policies by intervening in the exchange rate markets. This is particularly likely in other Asian countries, such as South Korea. As another example, government actions in South America to incentivize local production and balance trade are driving trade frictions between South American countries and also with Mexico, resulting in business environment instability and new trade barriers. We will continue to monitor and address developing issues around trade policy. Other Economic Factors. During 2016, mature market government bond yields and inflation were lower than expected. Although in recent months interest rates have risen, and deflation risks have receded somewhat, this is occurring against a backdrop of loose monetary policy, particularly in Europe and Japan. At the same time, government deficits and debt remain at high levels in many major markets. The eventual implications of higher government deficits and debt, with potentially higher long-term interest rates, may drive a higher cost of capital over our planning period. Higher interest rates and/or taxes to address the higher deficits also may impede real growth in gross domestic product and, therefore, vehicle sales over our planning period. For additional information on our assessment of the business environment, refer to the “Outlook” section below. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) 29 Trends and Strategies In 2016, we updated our vision and strategy to reflect our expansion to be an automotive and mobility company. Our strategy is to deliver top quartile shareholder returns through automotive and high-growth mobility businesses. We are doing this by focusing on the strategic priorities in both our core business and emerging opportunities that will fortify, 

GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

PART I

Item 1. Business
General Motors Company (sometimes referred to as we, our, us, ourselves, the Company, General Motors, or GM) was incorporated as a Delaware corporation in 2009. We design, build and sell cars, trucks, crossovers and automobile parts worldwide. We also provide automotive financing services through General Motors Financial Company, Inc. (GM Financial). Except for per share amounts or as otherwise specified, amounts presented within tables are stated in millions.

Automotive Our automotive operations meet the demands of our customers through our automotive segments: GM North America (GMNA), GM Europe (GME), GM International Operations (GMIO) and GM South America (GMSA).

GM primarily meets the demands of customers in North America with vehicles developed, manufactured and/or marketed under the Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet and GMC brands. GM primarily meets the demands of customers outside North America with vehicles developed, manufactured and/or marketed under the Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet, GMC, Holden, Opel and Vauxhall brands. We also have equity ownership stakes in regional joint ventures (JVs), which meet the demands of customers in Asia with vehicles developed, manufactured and/or marketed under the Baojun, Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet, Jiefang and Wuling brands.

In addition to the vehicles we sell through our dealer network to retail customers, we also sell vehicles directly or through our dealer network to fleet customers, including daily rental car companies, commercial fleet customers, leasing companies and governments. Our customers can obtain a wide range of aftersale vehicle services and products through our dealer network, such as maintenance, light repairs, collision repairs, vehicle accessories and extended service warranties.

Competitive Position and Vehicle Sales The principal factors that determine consumer vehicle preferences in the markets in which we operate include overall vehicle design, price, quality, available options, safety, reliability, fuel economy and functionality. Market leadership in individual countries in which we compete varies widely. We present both wholesale and retail vehicle sales data to assist in the analysis of our revenue and our market share.

Wholesale vehicle sales data, which represents sales directly to dealers and others, including sales to fleet customers, is the measure that correlates to our revenue from the sale of vehicles, which is the largest component of Automotive net sales and revenue. Wholesale vehicle sales exclude vehicles sold by joint ventures. In the year ended December 31, 2016, 46.3% of our wholesale vehicle sales volume was generated outside the U.S. The following table summarizes total wholesale vehicle sales of new vehicles by automotive segment (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
GMNA
3,958

 
63.4
%
 
3,558

 
60.5
%
 
3,320

 
55.0
%
GME
1,162

 
18.6
%
 
1,127

 
19.2
%
 
1,172

 
19.4
%
GMIO
559

 
8.9
%
 
588

 
10.0
%
 
655

 
10.9
%
GMSA
568

 
9.1
%
 
603

 
10.3
%
 
886

 
14.7
%
Worldwide
6,247

 
100.0
%
 
5,876

 
100.0
%
 
6,033

 
100.0
%

Retail vehicle sales data, which represents sales to end customers based upon the good faith estimates of management, including sales to fleet customers, does not correlate directly to the revenue we recognize during the period. However retail vehicle sales data is indicative of the underlying demand for our vehicles. Market share information is based primarily on retail vehicle sales volume. In countries where retail vehicle sales data is not readily available other data sources, such as wholesale or forecast volumes, are used to estimate retail vehicle sales to end customers.

Retail vehicle sales data includes all sales by joint ventures on a total vehicle basis, not based on the percentage of ownership in the joint venture. Certain joint venture agreements in China allow for the contractual right to report vehicle sales of non-GM trademarked vehicles by those joint ventures. Retail vehicle sales data includes vehicles used by dealers under courtesy transportation programs and vehicles sold through the dealer registration channel primarily in Europe. This sales channel consists primarily of dealer demonstrator, loaner and self-registered vehicles which are not eligible to be sold as new vehicles after being registered by dealers. Certain fleet sales that are accounted for as operating leases are included in retail vehicle sales at the time of delivery to daily rental car companies. The following table summarizes total industry retail sales, or estimated sales where retail sales volume is not available, of vehicles and our related competitive position by geographic region (vehicles in thousands):

1


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
 
Industry
 
GM
 
Market Share
 
Industry
 
GM
 
Market Share
 
Industry
 
GM
 
Market Share
North America
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
United States
17,882

 
3,043

 
17.0
%
 
17,854

 
3,082

 
17.3
%
 
16,859

 
2,935

 
17.4
%
Other
3,989

 
587

 
14.7
%
 
3,650

 
531

 
14.5
%
 
3,375

 
478

 
14.2
%
Total North America
21,871

 
3,630

 
16.6
%
 
21,504

 
3,613

 
16.8
%
 
20,234

 
3,413

 
16.9
%
Europe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
United Kingdom
3,121

 
289

 
9.3
%
 
3,063

 
312

 
10.2
%
 
2,845

 
305

 
10.7
%
Germany
3,709

 
260

 
7.0
%
 
3,540

 
244

 
6.9
%
 
3,357

 
237

 
7.1
%
Other
13,379

 
658

 
4.9
%
 
12,704

 
620

 
4.9
%
 
12,503

 
719

 
5.7
%
Total Europe(a)
20,209

 
1,207

 
6.0
%
 
19,307

 
1,176

 
6.1
%
 
18,705

 
1,261

 
6.7
%
Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
China(b)
28,270

 
3,914

 
13.8
%
 
25,050

 
3,730

 
14.9
%
 
24,035

 
3,540

 
14.7
%
Other
18,905

 
673

 
3.6
%
 
19,527

 
795

 
4.1
%
 
19,722

 
840

 
4.3
%
Total Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa
47,175

 
4,587

 
9.7
%
 
44,577

 
4,525

 
10.2
%
 
43,757

 
4,380

 
10.0
%
South America
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Brazil
2,048

 
346

 
16.9
%
 
2,568

 
388

 
15.1
%
 
3,498

 
579

 
16.6
%
Other
1,623

 
238

 
14.6
%
 
1,616

 
257

 
15.9
%
 
1,815

 
299

 
16.5
%
Total South America
3,671

 
584

 
15.9
%
 
4,184

 
645

 
15.4
%
 
5,313

 
878

 
16.5
%
Total Worldwide(c)
92,926

 
10,008

 
10.8
%
 
89,572

 
9,959

 
11.1
%
 
88,009

 
9,932

 
11.3
%
United States
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cars
6,895

 
890

 
12.9
%
 
7,483

 
931

 
12.4
%
 
7,617

 
1,085

 
14.2
%
Trucks
5,464

 
1,325

 
24.2
%
 
5,181

 
1,274

 
24.6
%
 
4,754

 
1,113

 
23.4
%
Crossovers
5,523

 
828

 
15.0
%
 
5,190

 
877

 
16.9
%
 
4,488

 
737

 
16.4
%
Total United States
17,882

 
3,043

 
17.0
%
 
17,854

 
3,082

 
17.3
%
 
16,859

 
2,935

 
17.4
%
China(b)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SGMS
 
 
1,806

 
 
 
 
 
1,711

 
 
 
 
 
1,710

 
 
SGMW and FAW-GM
 
 
2,108

 
 
 
 
 
2,019

 
 
 
 
 
1,830

 
 
Total China
28,270

 
3,914

 
13.8
%
 
25,050

 
3,730

 
14.9
%
 
24,035

 
3,540

 
14.7
%
__________
(a)
Our Europe sales include Opel and Vauxhall sales of 1,159, 1,113 and 1,078, and market share of 5.7%, 5.8% and 5.8% in the years ending December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014.
(b)
Our China sales include the Automotive China JVs SAIC General Motors Sales Co., Ltd. (SGMS), SAIC GM Wuling Automobile Co., Ltd. (SGMW) and FAW-GM Light Duty Commercial Vehicle Co., Ltd. (FAW-GM). Wholesale volumes were used for Industry, GM and Market Share. Our retail sales in China were 3,871, 3,613 and 3,435 in the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014. In 2017, we will begin using vehicle registrations data as the basis for calculating industry volume and market share in China on a prospective basis.
(c)
We do not currently export vehicles to Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Sudan or Syria. Accordingly these countries are excluded from industry sales data and corresponding calculation of market share.

In the year ended December 31, 2016 we estimate we had the largest market share in North America and South America, the number three market share in the Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa region, which included the number two market share in China, and the number eight market share in Europe. In the year ended December 31, 2016 the Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa region was our largest region by retail vehicle sales volume and represented 45.8% of our global retail vehicle sales. Refer to the Overview in Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) for discussion on changes in market share by region.


2


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

The sales and market share data provided in the table above includes both fleet vehicle sales and sales to retail customers. Certain fleet transactions, particularly sales to daily rental car companies, are generally less profitable than sales to retail customers. A significant portion of the sales to daily rental car companies are recorded as operating leases under U.S. GAAP with no recognition of revenue at the date of initial delivery due to guaranteed repurchase obligations. The following table summarizes estimated fleet sales and those sales as a percentage of total retail vehicle sales (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
GMNA
707

 
795

 
814

GME
551

 
544

 
505

GMIO
369

 
345

 
414

GMSA
157

 
121

 
176

Total fleet sales
1,784

 
1,805

 
1,909

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fleet sales as a percentage of total retail vehicle sales
17.8
%
 
18.1
%
 
19.2
%

The following table summarizes U.S. fleet sales (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Daily rental sales
327

 
400

 
449

Other fleet sales
269

 
278

 
255

Total fleet sales
596

 
678

 
704

Fleet sales as a percentage of total U.S. retail vehicle sales
 
 
 
 
 
Cars
24.9
%
 
29.3
%
 
29.5
%
Trucks
19.2
%
 
19.7
%
 
21.8
%
Crossovers
14.6
%
 
17.5
%
 
19.1
%
Total vehicles
19.6
%
 
22.0
%
 
24.0
%

Product Pricing Several methods are used to promote our products, including the use of dealer, retail and fleet incentives such as customer rebates and finance rate support. The level of incentives is dependent in large part upon the level of competition in the markets in which we operate and the level of demand for our products. In 2017 we plan to continue to price vehicles competitively, including offering incentives as required. We believe this strategy, coupled with sound inventory management, will continue to strengthen our brands.

Cyclical Nature of Business Retail sales are cyclical and production varies from month to month. Vehicle model changeovers occur throughout the year as a result of new market entries. The market for vehicles depends on general economic conditions, credit availability and consumer spending.

Relationship with Dealers We market vehicles worldwide primarily through a network of independent authorized retail dealers. These outlets include distributors, dealers and authorized sales, service and parts outlets.

The following table summarizes the number of authorized dealerships:
 
December 31, 2016
 
December 31, 2015
 
December 31, 2014
GMNA
4,857

 
4,886

 
4,908

GME
6,104

 
6,330

 
6,633

GMIO
7,232

 
7,755

 
7,699

GMSA
1,259

 
1,281

 
1,272

Total worldwide
19,452

 
20,252

 
20,512


We and our joint ventures enter into a contract with each authorized dealer agreeing to sell to the dealer one or more specified product lines at wholesale prices and granting the dealer the right to sell those vehicles to retail customers from an approved

3


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

location. Our dealers often offer more than one GM brand at a single dealership in a number of our markets in order to enhance dealer profitability. Authorized dealers offer parts, accessories, service and repairs for GM vehicles in the product lines that they sell using GM parts and accessories. Our dealers are authorized to service GM vehicles under our limited warranty program and those repairs are made only with GM parts. Our dealers generally provide their customers with access to credit or lease financing, vehicle insurance and extended service contracts provided by GM Financial and other financial institutions.

The quality of GM dealerships and our relationship with our dealers and distributors are critical to our success as dealers maintain the primary sales and service interface with the end consumer of our products. In addition to the terms of our contracts with our dealers we are regulated by various country and state franchise laws that may supersede those contractual terms and impose specific regulatory requirements and standards for initiating dealer network changes, pursuing terminations for cause and other contractual matters.

Research, Product and Business Development and Intellectual Property Costs for research, manufacturing engineering, product engineering and design and development activities relate primarily to developing new products or services or improving existing products or services including activities related to vehicle emissions control, improved fuel economy, the safety of drivers and passengers, urban mobility and autonomous vehicles. In the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 research and development expenses were $8.1 billion, $7.5 billion and $7.4 billion.

Product Development The Product Development organization is responsible for designing and integrating vehicle and powertrain components to maximize part sharing across multiple vehicle segments. Global teams in Design, Program Management, Component & Subsystem Engineering, Product Integrity, Safety, Propulsion and Purchasing & Supply Chain collaborate to meet customer requirements and maximize global economies of scale.

Our global vehicle architecture development has been consolidated and headquartered at our Global Technical Center in Warren, Michigan, to further the standardization of our overall vehicle development process. Cross-segment part sharing is an essential enabler to our Vehicle Set Strategy, designed to reduce our overall number of global vehicle architectures to four major vehicle sets. As we implement the four vehicle sets, we will continue to leverage our current architecture portfolio to accommodate our customers around the world while achieving our financial goals.

Hybrid, Plug-In, Extended Range and Battery Electric Vehicles We are investing in multiple technologies offering increasing levels of vehicle electrification including eAssist, plug-in hybrid, full hybrid, extended range and battery electric vehicles. We currently offer six models in the U.S. featuring some form of electrification and continue to develop plug-in hybrid electric vehicle technology and extended range electric vehicles such as the Chevrolet Volt. In 2016 we began production and sales of the Chevrolet Bolt EV, which provides an EPA-rated 238 miles of range on a full charge.

Car- and Ride-Sharing In 2016, we executed several steps in our strategy to redefine personal mobility. In January 2016 we announced a new car-sharing service called Maven, which combines our multiple car-sharing programs under a single brand. Maven gives customers access to highly personalized, on-demand mobility services. During 2016 we expanded our Maven offerings to 16 cities across the U.S. In January 2016 we also purchased a 9% equity ownership interest in Lyft, Inc. (Lyft), a privately held company, for $0.5 billion. In March 2016 we announced a new program called Express Drive, which leverages our Lyft relationship to expand our ride-sharing offerings. Under the Express Drive program, Lyft drivers in multiple cities across the U.S. can rent General Motors vehicles on a weekly basis. We are also considering additional options to expand our ride-sharing offerings. In November 2016 we announced that we are partnering with Uber Technologies Inc. (Uber) to pilot a program under which Uber drivers can rent General Motors vehicles on a weekly basis. Additionally, we plan to develop an integrated network of on-demand autonomous vehicles in the U.S.

Autonomous Technology We see autonomous technology leading to significant advances in convenience, mobility and safety, since more than 90% of crashes are caused by driver error. We have millions of miles of real-world experience with embedded connectivity through OnStar, LLC (OnStar) and advanced safety features that are the building blocks to more advanced automation features that we believe will eventually lead to fully autonomous vehicles. An example of advanced automation is Super Cruise, a hands-free driving customer convenience feature that will debut in 2017 on the Cadillac CT6 sedan.

In May 2016 we acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of Cruise Automation Inc. (Cruise), an autonomous vehicle technology company, to further accelerate our development of autonomous vehicles. We are also actively testing autonomous vehicles on public roads in San Francisco, California, Scottsdale, Arizona and Warren, Michigan.


4


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Alternative Fuel Vehicles We believe alternative fuels offer significant potential to reduce petroleum consumption in the transportation sector. By leveraging experience and capability developed around these technologies in our global operations we continue to develop FlexFuel vehicles that can run on gasoline-ethanol blend fuels as well as vehicles that run on compressed natural gas (CNG) and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG).

We currently offer 11 FlexFuel vehicles in the U.S. for the 2017 model year to retail customers plus an additional seven models to fleet and commercial customers capable of operating on gasoline, E85 ethanol or any combination of the two. In Brazil a substantial majority of vehicles sold were FlexFuel vehicles capable of running on 100% ethanol blends. We also market FlexFuel vehicles in other global markets where biofuels have emerged in the marketplace. In addition, we are studying ethanol-based fuels as well as other high-octane fuel blends and the role they can play in maximizing efficiencies of future internal combustion engine technology development to meet the escalating fuel economy and greenhouse gas emission regulations in the U.S. and other markets.

We produce CNG bi-fuel capable vehicles in Europe such as the Opel Zafira Tourer and the Opel Combo van. In the U.S. we are developing a program to offer a wide selection of truck and van options through a specialty vehicle manufacturing program, operating on CNG or LPG, which are suitable for fleet and commercial applications and retail customers alike. Availability is scheduled to begin in 2017. Globally, we offer CNG and LPG capable vehicles in select markets reflecting the infrastructure, regulatory focus and natural resource availability of the markets in which they are sold. We support the development of biodiesel blend fuels, which are alternative diesel fuels produced from renewable sources.

Hydrogen Fuel Cell Technology As part of our long-term strategy to reduce petroleum consumption and greenhouse gas emissions we are committed to development of our hydrogen fuel cell technology. Our Chevrolet Equinox fuel cell electric vehicle demonstration programs, such as Project Driveway, have accumulated more than 3 million miles of real-world driving by consumers, celebrities, business partners and government agencies. These programs are helping us identify consumer and infrastructure needs to understand the business case for potential production of vehicles with this technology. We are exploring non-traditional automotive uses for fuel cells in several areas, including demonstrations with the U.S. Army and U.S. Navy.

We signed a co-development agreement with Honda Motor Company in October 2016 for a next-generation fuel cell system and hydrogen storage technologies, aiming for the 2020 timeframe for commercialization. The collaboration expects to succeed by sharing expertise, economies of scale and common sourcing strategies and builds upon GM's and Honda Motor Company's strengths as leaders in hydrogen fuel cell technology.

Fuel Efficiency We are committed to improving fuel efficiency and meeting regulatory standards through a combination of strategies including: (1) extensive technology improvements to conventional powertrains; (2) increased use of smaller displacement engines and improved and advanced automatic transmissions; and (3) vehicle improvements including increased use of lighter, front-wheel drive architectures.

OnStar OnStar is a wholly-owned subsidiary of GM serving more than 7.2 million subscribers in the U.S., Canada, Mexico, China (through a joint venture), South America and Europe. OnStar is a provider of connected safety, security and mobility solutions and advanced information technology and is available on the majority of our 2017 model year vehicles. OnStar's key services include automatic crash response, stolen vehicle assistance, remote door unlock, turn-by-turn navigation, vehicle diagnostics, hands-free calling and 4G LTE wireless connectivity.

Intellectual Property We generate and hold a significant number of patents in a number of countries in connection with the operation of our business. While none of these patents are individually material to our business as a whole, these patents are important to our operations and continued technological development. We hold a number of trademarks and service marks that are very important to our identity and recognition in the marketplace.

Raw Materials, Services and Supplies We purchase a wide variety of raw materials, parts, supplies, energy, freight, transportation and other services from numerous suppliers to manufacture our products. The raw materials primarily include steel, aluminum, resins, copper, lead and platinum group metals. We have not experienced any significant shortages of raw materials and normally do not carry substantial inventories of such raw materials in excess of levels reasonably required to meet our production requirements.

In some instances, we purchase systems, components, parts and supplies from a single source and may be at an increased risk for supply disruptions. The inability or unwillingness of these sources to supply us with parts and supplies could have a material adverse effect on our production capacity. Refer to Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of these risks. Combined purchases

5


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

from our two largest suppliers have ranged from approximately 11% to 12% of our total purchases in the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014.

Environmental and Regulatory Matters

Automotive Emissions Control We are subject to laws and regulations that require us to control automotive emissions, including vehicle exhaust emission standards, vehicle evaporative emission standards and onboard diagnostic (OBD) system requirements. Advanced OBD systems are used to identify and diagnose problems with emission control systems. Problems detected by the OBD system and in-use compliance monitoring may increase warranty costs and the likelihood of recall. Emission and OBD requirements become more stringent each year as vehicles must meet lower emission standards and new diagnostics are required throughout the world with very little harmonization of global regulations. Zero emission vehicle (ZEV) requirements have been adopted by some U.S. states as well as the Canadian Province of Quebec and there is the possibility that additional jurisdictions could adopt ZEV requirements in the future. While we believe all our products are designed and manufactured in material compliance with substantially all vehicle emissions requirements, regulatory authorities may conduct ongoing evaluations of the emissions compliance of products from all manufacturers. This includes vehicle emissions testing, including CO2 and nitrogen oxide emissions testing, and review of emission control strategies.

The U.S. federal government imposes stringent emission control requirements on vehicles sold in the U.S. and various state governments impose additional requirements. Canada抯 federal government vehicle emission requirements are generally aligned with the U.S. federal requirements. Each model year we must obtain certification for each test group that our vehicles will meet emission requirements from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) before we can sell vehicles in the U.S. and Canada and from the California Air Resources Board (CARB) before we can sell vehicles in California and other states that have adopted the California emissions requirements.

CARB's latest emission requirements include more stringent exhaust emission and evaporative emission standards including an increase in ZEVs which must be offered for sale in California. CARB has adopted 2018 model year and later requirements for increasing volumes of ZEVs to achieve greenhouse gas as well as criteria pollutant emission reductions to help achieve the state's long-term greenhouse gas reduction goals. The EPA has adopted similar exhaust emission and evaporative emission standards which phase in with the 2017 model year, but do not include ZEV requirements. These new requirements will also increase the time and mileage periods over which manufacturers are responsible for a vehicle's emission performance.

The Clean Air Act permits states that have areas with air quality compliance issues to adopt the California car and light-duty truck emission standards in lieu of the federal requirements. Thirteen states currently have these standards in effect and 10 of these 13 states have adopted the ZEV requirements.

Emissions in the European Union are regulated by the European Commission (EC) and by governmental authorities in each European Union Member State (EU Member States). The EC imposes emission control requirements on vehicles sold in all 28 EU Member States. We must demonstrate that vehicles will meet emission requirements from an approval authority in one EU Member State before we can sell vehicles in any EU Member State. The regulatory requirements include random testing of newly assembled vehicles and a manufacturer in-use surveillance program. The European Union requirements are equivalent in terms of stringency and implementation to the framework of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.

The existing level of European Union exhaust emission standards for cars and light-duty trucks, Euro 6, was effective in 2014 for new vehicle approvals and 2015 for new vehicle registrations. Future emission standards focus particularly on further reducing emissions from diesel vehicles by introducing new testing criteria based on 搑eal world driving?emissions (RDE). RDE tests will become effective in 2017. The new requirements will require additional technologies and further increase the cost of diesel engines, which currently cost more than gasoline engines to manufacture. To comply with RDE tests we believe it will be necessary to implement technologies which will introduce additional cost pressures on the already challenging European Union market for small and mid-size diesel vehicles. Declines in diesel penetration may make fleet CO2 compliance more challenging. Gasoline engines are also affected by the new requirements. The potential implementation of technology into gasoline vehicles to reduce exhaust pollutant emissions may further increase the cost of gasoline engines and could have adverse effects on vehicle fuel economy.

In addition, increased scrutiny of compliance with emissions standards may result in changes to these standards, including the implementation of RDE tests, as well as stricter interpretations or redefinition of these standards and more rigorous enforcement. This may lead to increased costs, penalties, lack of certainty with respect to product portfolio planning, negative publicity or reputation impact for us. Refer to Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of these risks.

6


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


In the long-term, we expect that the EC will continue devising regulatory requirements on the emission test cycle, RDE, low temperature testing, fuel evaporation and OBD.

China has implemented European type China 4 standards nationally with European OBD requirements for new vehicle registrations. Cities such as Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou each currently require China 5 standards for new vehicle registrations. China implemented the China 5 standards for light duty gasoline nationwide at the beginning of 2017. The China 5 standards include more stringent emission requirements and increase the time and mileage periods over which manufacturers are responsible for a vehicle's emission performance. China officially released a unique China 6 emission standard with the potential to combine elements of both European and U.S. standards. Local implementation is expected as early as 2018. Nationwide implementation for new registrations is expected in July 2020 for the base China 6a standard and July 2023 for the more stringent China 6b standard.

In South America certain countries follow the U.S. test procedures, standards and OBD requirements and others follow the European Union test procedures, standards and OBD requirements with different levels of stringency. Brazil implemented national L6 standards for light diesel vehicles in 2012 and OBD installation for light diesel vehicles in 2015. L6 standards for light gasoline vehicles were implemented in 2015 for all models.

Automotive Fuel Economy In the U.S., Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) reporting is required for three separate fleets: domestically produced cars, imported cars and light-duty trucks. Both car and light-duty truck standards were established using targets for various vehicle sizes and vehicle model sales volumes. In 2017 our domestic car standard is estimated to be 38.1 mpg, our import car standard is estimated to be 41.7 mpg, and our light-duty truck standard is estimated to be 27.6 mpg. Our current product plan is expected to be compliant with the federal CAFE program through the 2017 model year. In addition to federal CAFE reporting, the EPA requires compliance with greenhouse gas requirements that are similar to the CAFE program. Our current product plan is expected to be compliant with the federal greenhouse gas program through the 2017 model year. CARB has agreed that compliance with the federal program is deemed to be compliant with the California program for the 2012 through 2017 model years. Although Canada has no parallel CAFE-style fuel economy regulations there are Canadian greenhouse gas regulations that are aligned with the U.S. EPA regulations and Canadian fleets are expected to be compliant with these regulations through the 2017 model year. We regularly evaluate our current and future product plans and strategies for compliance with fuel economy and greenhouse gas regulations.

Unlike other jurisdictions, the European Union's climate change policy framework focuses on fleet average CO2 emissions rather than fuel economy. The European Union has implemented legislation regulating fleet average CO2 emissions in Europe and has adopted an even more stringent fleet average CO2 target for 2020. Requirements must be met through the introduction of CO2 reducing technologies on conventional gasoline and diesel engines or through ultra-low CO2 vehicles. We are developing a compliance plan by adopting operational CO2 targets for each market entry in Europe. The EC will also devise regulatory requirements on the CO2 emission test cycle as of 2017.

China has both an individual vehicle pass-fail type approval requirement based on Phase 3 standards and a fleet fuel consumption requirement based on Phase 4 standards effective in 2016. The China Phase 4 fleet fuel consumption standard is based on curb weight with full compliance to 5.0 L/100 km required by 2020. China has continued subsidies for plug-in hybrid, battery electric and fuel cell vehicles. China proposes a Phase 5 fleet fuel consumption standard effective beginning in 2021 with full compliance to 4.0L/100km required by 2025.

In Brazil the government has set fuel economy requirements called Inovar Auto. Original equipment manufacturers have mandatory fleet average compliance required by October 2017 resulting in a reduction from 2012 levels. The Brazilian government provides indirect tax incentives to eligible participant companies that meet certain requirements including these fuel economy targets. The level of potential indirect tax incentives varies based on the timing and degree to which the targets are met. Participating companies that fail to meet the required criteria are subject to clawback provisions and specific fines.

Industrial Environmental Control Our operations are subject to a wide range of environmental protection laws including those regulating air emissions, water discharge, waste management and environmental cleanup. Certain environmental statutes require that responsible parties fund remediation actions regardless of fault, legality of original disposal or ownership of a disposal site. Under certain circumstances these laws impose joint and several liability as well as liability for related damages to natural resources.

To mitigate the effects our worldwide operations have on the environment and reduce greenhouse gas emissions associated with waste disposal, we are committed to converting as many of our worldwide operations as possible to landfill-free operations. At December 31, 2016, 100 (or approximately 60%) of our manufacturing operations were landfill-free. Additionally we have 52

7


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

non-manufacturing operations that are landfill-free. At our landfill-free manufacturing operations approximately 90% of waste materials are reused or recycled and approximately 10% are converted to energy at waste-to-energy facilities. Including construction, demolition and remediation wastes, we estimate that we reused, recycled or composted over 2.5 million metric tons of waste materials at our global manufacturing operations, converted over 137,000 metric tons of waste materials to energy at waste-to-energy facilities and avoided approximately 9 million metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions in the year ended December 31, 2016.

In addition to minimizing our impact on the environment our landfill-free program and total waste reduction commitments generate revenue from the sale of production by-products, reduce our use of material, reduce our carbon footprint and help to reduce the risks and financial liabilities associated with waste disposal.

We continue to search for ways to increase our use of renewable energy and improve our energy efficiency and work to drive growth and scale of renewables. We have committed to meeting the electricity needs of our operations worldwide with renewable energy by 2050. At December 31, 2016 we had implemented projects globally that had increased our total renewable energy capacity to over 167 megawatts. In 2016 we also met the EPA Energy Star Challenge for Industry (EPA Challenge) at 12 of our sites globally by reducing energy intensity an average of 18% at these sites. To meet the EPA Challenge industrial sites must reduce energy intensity by 10% in five years or fewer. Two of the sites achieved the goal for the first time, bringing the total number of GM-owned sites to have met the EPA Challenge to 75, with many sites achieving the goal multiple times. These efforts minimize our utility expenses and are part of our approach to addressing climate change through setting a greenhouse gas emissions reduction target, collecting accurate data, following our business plan and publicly reporting progress against our target.

Chemical Regulations We continually monitor the implementation of chemical regulations to maintain compliance and evaluate their effect on our business, suppliers and the automotive industry.

Governmental agencies in both the U.S. and Canada continue to introduce new regulations and legislation related to the selection and use of chemicals or substances of concern by mandating broad prohibitions, green chemistry, life cycle analysis and product stewardship initiatives. These initiatives give broad regulatory authority to ban or restrict the use of certain chemical substances and potentially affect automobile manufacturers' responsibilities for vehicle components at the end of a vehicle's life, as well as chemical selection for product development and manufacturing. Chemical restrictions in Canada are progressing rapidly as a result of Environment Canada抯 Chemical Management Plan to assess existing substances and implement risk management controls on any chemical deemed toxic. In June 2016, the U.S. enacted the Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act that grants the EPA more authority to regulate and ban chemicals from use in the U.S. and is expected to increase the level of regulation of chemicals in vehicles. These emerging regulations will potentially lead to increases in costs and supply chain complexity. We believe that we are materially in compliance with substantially all of these requirements or expect to be materially in compliance by the required date.

In 2007 the European Union implemented its regulatory requirements, the EU REACH regulation among others, to register, evaluate, authorize and restrict the use of chemical substances. This regulation requires chemical substances manufactured in or imported into the European Union to be registered with the European Chemicals Agency before 2018. Under this regulation, 搒ubstances of very high concern?may either require authorization for further use or may be restricted in the future. This could potentially increase the cost of certain alternative substances that are used to manufacture vehicles and parts, or result in a supply chain disruption when a substance is no longer available to meet production timelines. Our research and development initiatives may be used to address future requirements. We believe that we are materially in compliance with substantially all of these requirements or expect to be materially in compliance by the required date.

There are various regulations in China stipulating the requirements for chemical management. Among other things, these regulations catalogue and restrict the use and the import and export of various chemical substances. The failure of our joint venture partners or our suppliers to comply with these regulations could disrupt production in China or prevent our joint venture partners from selling the affected products in the China market.

Safety In the U.S. the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 prohibits the sale of any new vehicle or equipment in the U.S. that does not conform to applicable vehicle safety standards established by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). If we or NHTSA determine that either a vehicle or vehicle equipment does not comply with a safety standard or if a vehicle defect creates an unreasonable safety risk the manufacturer is required to notify owners and provide a remedy. We are required to report certain information relating to certain customer complaints, warranty claims, field reports and notices and claims involving property damage, injuries and fatalities in the U.S. and claims involving fatalities outside the U.S. We are also required to report certain information concerning safety recalls and other safety campaigns outside the U.S.

8


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


Outside the U.S. safety standards and recall regulations often have the same purpose as the U.S. standards but may differ in their requirements and test procedures, adding complexity to regulatory compliance.

Automotive Financing - GM Financial GM Financial is our global captive automotive finance company and our global provider of automobile finance solutions. GM Financial conducts its business in North America, Europe, South America and through a joint venture in China.

GM Financial provides retail loan and lease lending across the credit spectrum. Additionally GM Financial offers commercial products to dealers that include new and used vehicle inventory financing, inventory insurance, working capital, capital improvement loans, and storage center financing.

In North America GM Financial's retail automobile finance programs include prime and sub-prime lending and full credit spectrum leasing. The sub-prime lending program is primarily offered to consumers with FICO scores less than 620 who have limited access to automobile financing through banks and credit unions and is expected to sustain a higher level of credit losses than prime lending. The leasing product is offered through our franchised dealers and primarily targets prime consumers leasing new vehicles. GM Financial has expanded its leasing, near prime and prime lending programs through our franchised dealers, and as a result, leasing and prime lending have become a larger percentage of originations and the retail portfolio balance.

Internationally GM Financial抯 retail automobile finance programs focus on prime quality financing through loan and lease products.

Generally GM Financial seeks to fund its operations in each country through local sources to minimize currency and country risk. GM Financial primarily finances its loan, lease and commercial origination volume through the use of secured and unsecured credit facilities, through securitization transactions where such markets are developed and through the issuance of unsecured debt in public markets including accepting deposits from retail banking customers in Germany.

Employees At December 31, 2016 we employed 135,000 (60%) hourly employees and 90,000 (40%) salaried employees. At December 31, 2016 55,000 (53%) of our U.S. employees were represented by unions, a majority of which were represented by the International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace and Agriculture Implement Workers of America (UAW). The following table summarizes worldwide employment (in thousands):
 
December 31, 2016
 
December 31, 2015
 
December 31, 2014
GMNA
124

 
115

 
110

GME
38

 
36

 
37

GMIO
32

 
32

 
33

GMSA
22

 
24

 
29

GM Financial
9

 
8

 
7

Total Worldwide
225

 
215

 
216

 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. - Salaried
50

 
45

 
40

U.S. - Hourly
55

 
52

 
51


Executive Officers of the Registrant As of February 7, 2017 the names and ages of our executive officers and their positions with GM are as follows:

9


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Name (Age)
 
Present GM Position (Effective Date)
 
Positions Held During the Past Five Years (Effective Date)
Mary T. Barra (55)
 
Chairman & Chief Executive Officer (2016)
 
Chief Executive Officer and Member of the Board of Directors (2014) Executive Vice President, Global Product Development, Purchasing & Supply Chain (2013)
Senior Vice President, Global Product Development (2011)
Daniel Ammann (44)
 
President (2014)
 
Executive Vice President & Chief Financial Officer (2013)
Senior Vice President & Chief Financial Officer (2011)

Alan S. Batey (53)
 
Executive Vice President & President, North America (2014)
 
Senior Vice President, Global Chevrolet and Brand Chief and U.S. Sales and Marketing (2013)
GM Vice President, U.S. Sales and Service, and Interim GM Chief Marketing Officer (2012)
Vice President, U.S. Chevrolet Sales and Service (2010)
Alicia Boler-Davis (47)
 
Executive Vice President, Global Manufacturing (2016)
 
Senior Vice President, Global Connected Customer Experience (2014)
Vice President, Global Quality and U.S. Customer Experience (2012)
Carel Johannes de Nysschen (56)
 
Executive Vice President & President, Cadillac (2014)
 
Infiniti Motor Company, President (2012)
Audi of America, Inc., President (2004)
Barry L. Engle (53)
 
Executive Vice President & President, South America (2015)
 
Agility Fuel Systems, CEO (2011)
Stefan Jacoby (58)
 
Executive Vice President & President, GM International (2013)
 
Volvo Car Corporation - Global Chief Executive Officer and President (2010)
Craig B. Glidden (59)
 
Executive Vice President & General Counsel (2015)
 
LyondellBasell, Executive Vice President and Chief Legal Officer (2009)
Karl-Thomas Neumann (55)
 
Executive Vice President & President, Europe and Chairman of the Management Board of Opel Group GmbH (2013)
 
CEO, Opel Group GmbH & President, GM Europe (2013)
Volkswagen Group China - Chief Executive Officer and President (2010)
John J. Quattrone (64)
 
Senior Vice President, Global Human Resources (2014)
 
VP of Human Resources, Global Product Development & Global Purchasing & Supply Chain / Corporate Strategy, Business Development & Global Planning & Program organizations (2009)
Mark L. Reuss (53)
 
Executive Vice President, Global Product Development, Purchasing & Supply Chain (2014)
 
Executive Vice President & President, North America (2013)
GM Vice President & President, North America (2009)
Charles K. Stevens, III (57)
 
Executive Vice President & Chief Financial Officer (2014)
 
Chief Financial Officer, GM North America (2010)
Interim Chief Financial Officer, GM South America (2011)
Matthew Tsien (56)
 
Executive Vice President & President, GM China (2014)
 
GM Consolidated International Operations Vice President, Planning, Program Management, & Strategic Alliances China (2012)
Executive Vice President, SAIC GM Wuling (2009)
Thomas S. Timko (48)
 
Vice President, Controller & Chief Accounting Officer (2013)
 
Applied Materials Inc. - Corporate Vice President, Chief Accounting Officer, and Corporate Controller (2010)

There are no family relationships between any of the officers named above and there is no arrangement or understanding between any of the officers named above and any other person pursuant to which he or she was selected as an officer. Each of the officers named above was elected by the Board of Directors to hold office until the next annual election of officers and until his or her successor is elected and qualified or until his or her earlier resignation or removal. The Board of Directors elects the officers immediately following each annual meeting of the stockholders and may appoint other officers between annual meetings.

Segment Reporting Data Operating segment data and principal geographic area data for the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 are summarized in Note 23 to our consolidated financial statements.

Website Access to Our Reports Our internet website address is www.gm.com. In addition to the information about us and our subsidiaries contained in this 2016 Form 10-K information about us can be found on our website including information on our corporate governance principles and practices. Our Investor Relations website at www.gm.com/investors contains a significant amount of information about us, including financial and other information for investors. We encourage investors to visit our website,

10


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

as we frequently update and post new information about our company on our website and it is possible that this information could be deemed to be material information. Our website and information included in or linked to our website are not part of this 2016 Form 10-K.

Our annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act) are available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after they are electronically filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The public may read and copy the materials we file with the SEC at the SEC's Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. Additionally the SEC maintains an internet site that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information. The address of the SEC's website is www.sec.gov.

*  *  *  *  *  *  *

Item 1A. Risk Factors

We face a number of significant risks and uncertainties in connection with our operations. Our business and the results of our operations could be materially adversely affected by the factors described below. The risks described below are not the only risks facing our operations. Risks and uncertainties not currently known to us or that we currently deem to be immaterial also could have a material adverse impact on our business and results of operations.

If we do not deliver new products, services and customer experiences in response to new participants in the automotive industry, our business could suffer. We believe that the automotive industry will experience significant and continued change in the coming years. In addition to our traditional competitors, we must also be responsive to the entrance of non-traditional participants in the automotive industry. These non-traditional participants may seek to disrupt the historic business model of the industry through the introduction of new technologies, new products or services, new business models or new methods of travel. It is strategically significant that we lead the technological disruption occurring in our industry. As our business evolves, the pressure to innovate will encompass a wider range of products and services, including products and services that may be outside of our historically core business, such as autonomous vehicles, car- and ride-sharing and transportation as a service. If we do not accurately predict, prepare for and respond to new kinds of technological innovations, market developments and changing customer needs, our sales, profitability and long-term competitiveness may be harmed.

Our ability to maintain profitability is dependent upon our ability to fund and introduce new and improved vehicle models that are able to attract a sufficient number of consumers. We operate in a very competitive industry with market participants routinely introducing new and improved vehicle models designed to meet rapidly evolving consumer expectations. Producing new and improved vehicle models competitively and preserving our reputation for designing, building and selling high quality cars and trucks is critical to our long-term profitability. We will launch a substantial number of new vehicles in 2017. Successful launches of our new vehicles are critical to our short-term profitability. In addition, our growth strategies require us to make significant investment in our brands to appeal to new markets.

Our long-term profitability depends upon successfully creating and funding technological innovations in design, engineering and manufacturing, which requires extensive capital investment and the ability to retain and recruit talent. In some cases the technologies that we plan to employ are not yet commercially practical and depend on significant future technological advances by us and by our suppliers. Although we will seek to obtain intellectual property protection for our innovations to protect our competitive position, it is possible we may not be able to protect some of these innovations. There can be no assurance that advances in technology will occur in a timely or feasible way, or that others will not acquire similar or superior technologies sooner than we do or that we will acquire technologies on an exclusive basis or at a significant price advantage.
It generally takes two years or more to design and develop a new vehicle, and a number of factors may lengthen that time period. Because of this product development cycle and the various elements that may contribute to consumers?acceptance of new vehicle designs, including competitors?product introductions, technological innovations, fuel prices, general economic conditions and changes in styling preferences, an initial product concept or design may not result in a vehicle that generates sales in sufficient quantities and at high enough prices to be profitable. Our high proportion of fixed costs, both due to our significant investment in property, plant and equipment as well as other requirements of our collective bargaining agreements, which limit our flexibility to adjust personnel costs to changes in demands for our products, may further exacerbate the risks associated with incorrectly assessing demand for our vehicles.

11


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Our profitability is dependent upon the success of full-size pick-up trucks and SUVs. While we offer a balanced and complete portfolio of small, mid-size and large cars, crossovers, sport utility vehicles (SUVs) and trucks, we generally recognize higher profit margins on our full-size pick-up trucks and SUVs. Our success is dependent upon consumer preferences and our ability to sell higher margin vehicles in sufficient volumes. Any shift in consumer preferences toward smaller, more fuel efficient vehicles, whether as a result of increases in the price of oil or any sustained shortage of oil, including as a result of global political instability or other reasons, could weaken the demand for our higher margin full-size pick-up trucks and SUVs.

Our business is highly dependent upon global automobile market sales volume, which can be volatile. Our business and financial results are highly sensitive to sales volume, changes to which can have a disproportionately large effect on our profitability. A number of economic and market conditions drive changes in vehicle sales, including real estate values, levels of unemployment, availability of affordable financing, fluctuations in the cost of fuel, consumer confidence, political unrest and global economic conditions. We cannot predict future economic and market conditions with certainty.

Our business in China is subject to aggressive competition. Maintaining a strong position in the Chinese market is a key component of our global growth strategy. The automotive market in China is highly competitive with competition from many of the largest global manufacturers and numerous smaller domestic manufacturers. As the size of the Chinese market continues to increase we anticipate that additional competitors, both international and domestic, will seek to enter the Chinese market and that existing market participants will act aggressively to increase their market share. Increased competition may result in price reductions, reduced margins and our inability to gain or hold market share.

The international scale and footprint of our operations exposes us to additional risks. We manufacture, sell and service products globally and rely upon a global supply chain to deliver the raw materials, components, systems and parts that we need to manufacture our products. Our global operations subject us to extensive domestic and foreign regulations and expose us to a variety of domestic and foreign political, economic and other risks, including: changes in foreign or domestic government leadership; changes in foreign or domestic laws or regulations impacting our overall business model or restricting our ability to manufacture, purchase or sell products, and political pressures to change any aspect of our business model or practices and source raw materials, components, systems and parts on competitive terms in a manner consistent with our current practice; changes in domestic or foreign tax laws; economic tensions between governments and changes in international trade and investment policies, including restrictions on the repatriation of dividends, especially between the U.S. and China, more detailed inspections, new or higher tariffs, for example, on products imported from Mexico into the U.S.; new barriers to entry or domestic preference procurement requirements, or changes to or withdrawals from free trade agreements; changes in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates; economic downturns in foreign countries or geographic regions where we have significant operations, such as China; significant changes in conditions in the countries in which we operate with the effect of competition from new market entrants and in the United Kingdom (U.K.) with passage of a referendum to discontinue membership in the European Union; differing local product preferences and product requirements, including fuel economy, vehicle emissions and safety; impact of compliance with U.S. and other foreign countries?export controls and economic sanctions; liabilities resulting from U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, including those related to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and certain other anti-corruption laws; differing labor regulations and union relationships; and difficulties in obtaining financing in foreign countries for local operations.

A significant amount of our operations are conducted by joint ventures that we cannot operate solely for our benefit. Many of our operations, primarily in China, are carried out by joint ventures. In joint ventures we share ownership and management of a company with one or more parties who may not have the same goals, strategies, priorities or resources as we do and may compete with us outside the joint venture. Joint ventures are intended to be operated for the equal benefit of all co-owners, rather than for our exclusive benefit. Operating a business as a joint venture often requires additional organizational formalities as well as time-consuming procedures for sharing information and making decisions. In joint ventures we are required to foster our relationships with our co-owners as well as promote the overall success of the joint venture, and if a co-owner changes or relationships deteriorate, our success in the joint venture may be materially adversely affected. The benefits from a successful joint venture are shared among the co-owners, therefore we do not receive all the benefits from our successful joint ventures. In addition, because we share ownership and management with one or more parties, we may have limited control over the actions of a joint venture, particularly when we own a minority interest. As a result, we may be unable to prevent misconduct or other violations of applicable laws by a joint venture. Moreover, a joint venture may not follow the same requirements regarding compliance, internal controls and internal control over financial reporting that we follow. To the extent another party makes decisions that negatively impact the joint venture or internal control issues arise within the joint venture, we may have to take responsive or other action or we may be subject to penalties, fines or other related actions for these activities.

We are subject to extensive laws, governmental regulations and policies, including those regarding fuel economy and emissions controls, that can significantly increase our costs and affect how we do business. We are significantly affected by governmental

12


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

regulations that can increase costs related to the production of our vehicles and affect our product portfolio. Meeting or exceeding many of these regulations is costly and often technologically challenging, especially where standards may not be harmonized across jurisdictions, a significant challenge with respect to mandated emissions and fuel economy standards. We anticipate that the number and extent of these regulations, and the related costs and changes to our product portfolio, may increase significantly in the future. These government regulatory requirements could significantly affect our plans for global product development and given the uncertainty surrounding enforcement and regulatory definitions, may result in substantial costs, including civil or criminal penalties. In addition, an evolving but un-harmonized regulatory framework may limit or dictate the types of vehicles we sell and where we sell them, which can affect revenue. Refer to the "Environmental and Regulatory Matters" section of Item 1. Business for further information on these regulatory requirements. We also expect that manufacturers will continue to be subject to increased scrutiny from regulators globally. For example, in Germany, the Ministry of Transportation and the Kraftfahrt-Bundesamt have requested the participation of a number of automotive manufacturers, including our German subsidiary, in continuing discussions on emissions control issues and have also requested, from time to time, written responses from our subsidiary on the subject. Our German subsidiary has participated in these discussions and has provided the requested responses to inquiries concerning nitrogen oxide emission control systems of its diesel engines. In addition, the German and the EU Parliaments have instigated Inquiry Commissions into government agencies' oversight of emissions enforcement, requesting our German subsidiary's participation. At the same time, the German government has initiated further industry-wide inquiries about CO2 emissions. This scrutiny, regulatory changes or novel interpretations of current regulations, as well as increased enforcement has led to and may result in further increased testing and re-testing of our vehicles and analysis of their emissions control systems, which could lead to increased costs, penalties, negative publicity or reputational impact, and recall activity if regulators determine that emission levels and required regulatory compliance should be based on either a wider spectrum of driving conditions for future testing parameters or stricter or novel interpretations and consequent enforcement of existing requirements. No assurance can be given that the ultimate outcome of any potential investigations or increased testing resulting from this scrutiny would not materially and adversely affect us.

We expect that to comply with fuel economy and emission control requirements we will be required to sell a significant volume of hybrid electric vehicles, as well as develop and implement new technologies for conventional internal combustion engines, all at increased cost levels. There is no assurance that we will be able to produce and sell vehicles that use such technologies on a profitable basis or that our customers will purchase such vehicles in the quantities necessary for us to comply with these regulatory programs. Alternative compliance measures may not be sufficiently available in the marketplace to meet volume driven compliance requirements.

In the current uncertain regulatory framework, environmental liabilities for which we may be responsible and that are not reasonably estimable could be substantial. Alleged violations of safety or emissions standards could result in legal proceedings, the recall of one or more of our products, negotiated remedial actions, fines, restricted product offerings or a combination of any of those items. Any of these actions could have substantial adverse effects on our operations including facility idling, reduced employment, increased costs and loss of revenue.

We could be materially adversely affected by a negative outcome in unusual or significant litigation, governmental investigations or other legal proceedings. We are subject to legal proceedings involving various issues, including product liability lawsuits, stockholder litigation and governmental investigations, such as the legal proceedings related to the Ignition Switch Recall. Such legal proceedings could in the future result in the imposition of damages, including punitive damages, substantial fines, civil lawsuits and criminal penalties, interruptions of business, modification of business practices, equitable remedies and other sanctions against us or our personnel as well as significant legal and other costs. For a further discussion of these matters refer to Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements.

If, in the discretion of the U.S. Attorney抯 Office for the Southern District of New York (the Office), we do not comply with the terms of the Deferred Prosecution Agreement (the DPA), the Office may prosecute us for charges alleged by the Office including those relating to faulty ignition switches. On September 17, 2015 we announced that we entered into the DPA with the Office regarding its investigation of the events leading up to certain recalls announced in February and March of 2014 relating to faulty ignition switches. Under the DPA, we consented to, among other things, the filing of a two-count information (the Information) in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York charging GM with a scheme to conceal material facts from a government regulator and wire fraud. We pled not guilty to the charges alleged in the Information. The DPA further provides that, in the event the Office determines during the period of deferral of prosecution (or any extensions thereof) that we have violated any provision of the DPA, including violating any U.S. federal law or our obligation to cooperate with and assist the independent monitor, the Office may, in its discretion, either prosecute us on the charges alleged in the Information or impose an extension of the period of deferral of prosecution of up to one additional year. Under such circumstance, the Office would be permitted to rely

13


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

upon the admissions we made in the DPA and would benefit from our waiver of certain procedural and evidentiary defenses. Such a criminal prosecution could subject us to penalties.

The costs and effect on our reputation of product safety recalls could materially adversely affect our business. Government safety standards require manufacturers to remedy certain product safety defects through recall campaigns. Under these standards, we could be subject to civil or criminal penalties or may incur various costs, including significant costs for free repairs. At present, the costs we incur in connection with these recalls typically include the cost of the part being replaced and labor to remove and replace the defective part. We currently source a variety of systems, components, raw materials and parts, including but not limited to air bag inflators, from third parties. From time to time these items may have performance or quality issues that could harm our reputation and cause us to incur significant costs. For example, we are currently conducting recalls for certain Takata Corporation (Takata) air bag inflators used in some of our prior model year vehicles. We are continuing to assess the situation. Further recalls, if any, that may be required to remediate Takata air bag inflators in our vehicles could have a material impact on our business. In addition, product recalls can harm our reputation and cause us to lose customers, particularly if those recalls cause consumers to question the safety or reliability of our products. Conversely not issuing a recall or not issuing a recall on a timely basis can harm our reputation, potentially expose us to significant monetary penalties, and cause us to lose customers for the same reasons as expressed above.

Any disruption in our suppliers' operations could disrupt our production schedule. Our automotive operations are dependent upon the continued ability of our suppliers to deliver the systems, components, raw materials and parts that we need to manufacture our products. Our use of 搄ust-in-time?manufacturing processes allows us to maintain minimal inventory quantities of systems, components, raw materials and parts. As a result our ability to maintain production is dependent upon our suppliers delivering sufficient quantities of systems, components, raw materials and parts on time to meet our production schedules. In some instances we purchase systems, components, raw materials and parts from a single source and may be at an increased risk for supply disruptions. Financial difficulties or solvency problems with our suppliers, including Takata, which may be exacerbated by the cost of remediating quality issues with these items, could lead to uncertainty in our supply chain or cause supply disruptions for us which could, in turn, disrupt our operations, including production of certain of our higher margin vehicles. Where we experience supply disruptions, we may not be able to develop alternate sourcing quickly. Any disruption of our production schedule caused by an unexpected shortage of systems, components, raw materials or parts even for a relatively short period of time could cause us to alter production schedules or suspend production entirely.

We are dependent on our manufacturing facilities around the world. We assemble vehicles at various facilities around the world. These facilities are typically designed to produce particular models for particular geographic markets. No single facility is designed to manufacture our full range of vehicles. In some cases certain facilities produce products that disproportionately contribute a greater degree to our profitability than others. Should these or other facilities become unavailable either temporarily or permanently for any number of reasons, including labor disruptions, the inability to manufacture vehicles there may result in harm to our reputation, increased costs, lower revenues and the loss of customers. We may not be able to easily shift production of vehicles at an inoperable facility to other facilities or to make up for lost production. Any new facility needed to replace an inoperable manufacturing facility would need to comply with the necessary regulatory requirements, need to satisfy our specialized manufacturing requirements and require specialized equipment. Even though we carry business interruption insurance policies, we may suffer losses as a result of business interruptions that exceed the coverage available or any losses which may be excluded under our insurance policies.

We operate in a highly competitive industry that has excess manufacturing capacity and attempts by our competitors to sell more vehicles could have a significant negative effect on our vehicle pricing, market share and operating results. The global automotive industry is highly competitive and overall manufacturing capacity in the industry exceeds demand. Many manufacturers have relatively high fixed labor costs as well as significant limitations on their ability to close facilities and reduce fixed costs. Our competitors may respond to these relatively high fixed costs by providing subsidized financing or leasing programs, offering marketing incentives or reducing vehicle prices. Our competitors may also seek to benefit from economies of scale by consolidating or entering into other strategic agreements such as alliances intended to enhance their competitiveness.

Domestic manufacturers in lower cost countries, such as China and India, have become competitors in key emerging markets and announced their intention to export their products to established markets as a low cost alternative to established entry-level automobiles. In addition, foreign governments may decide to implement tax and other policies that favor their domestic manufacturers at the expense of international manufacturers, including GM and its joint venture partners. These actions have had, and are expected to continue to have, a significant negative effect on our vehicle pricing, market share and operating results, and present a significant risk to our ability to enhance our revenue per vehicle.


14


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

We may continue to restructure or divest our operations in various countries, but we may not succeed in doing so. We face difficult market and operating conditions in certain parts of the world that may require us to restructure or rationalize these operations, which may result in impairments. In many countries across our regions we have experienced challenges in our operations and continue to strategically assess the manner in which we operate in certain countries. As we continue to assess our performance throughout our regions, additional restructuring and rationalization actions may be required and may be material.

Our future competitiveness and ability to achieve long-term profitability depends on our ability to control our costs, which requires us to successfully implement operating effectiveness initiatives throughout our automotive operations. We are continuing to implement a number of operating effectiveness initiatives to improve productivity and reduce costs. Our future competitiveness depends upon our continued success in implementing these initiatives throughout our automotive operations. While some of the elements of cost reduction are within our control, others, such as interest rates or return on investments, which influence our expense for pensions, depend more on external factors, and there can be no assurance that such external factors will not materially adversely affect our ability to reduce our costs. Reducing costs may prove difficult due to our focus on increasing advertising and our belief that engineering and other expenses necessary to improve the performance, safety and customer satisfaction of our vehicles and to continue to innovate our technology and product offerings to meet changing customer needs and market developments are likely to increase.

Security breaches and other disruptions to our vehicles, information technology networks and systems could interfere with the safety of our customers or our operations and could compromise the confidentiality of private customer data or our proprietary information. We rely upon information technology networks and systems, including in-vehicle systems and mobile devices, some of which are managed by third-parties, to process, transmit and store electronic information, and to manage or support a variety of vehicle or business processes and activities. Additionally we collect and store sensitive data, including intellectual property, proprietary business information, proprietary business information of our dealers and suppliers, as well as personally identifiable information of our customers and employees, in data centers and on information technology networks. The secure operation of these information technology networks and in-vehicle systems, and the processing and maintenance of this information, is critical to our business operations and strategy. Despite security measures and business continuity plans, our information technology networks and systems and in-vehicle systems may be vulnerable to damage, disruptions or shutdowns due to attacks by hackers or breaches due to errors or malfeasance by employees, contractors and others who have access to our networks and systems or computer viruses. The occurrence of any of these events could compromise our networks and the information stored there could be accessed, publicly disclosed, lost or stolen. These occurrences could also impact vehicle safety. We have been the target of these types of attacks in the past and future attacks are likely to occur. If successful, these types of attacks on our network or systems, including in-vehicle systems and mobile devices, or service failures could result in, among other things, the loss of proprietary data, interruptions or delays in our business operations and damage to our reputation. In addition, any such access, disruption, technological failures, disclosure or other loss of information could result in legal claims or proceedings, liability or regulatory penalties under laws protecting the privacy of personal information, disrupt operations and reduce the competitive advantage we hope to derive from our investment in advanced technologies.

We rely on GM Financial to provide financial services to our dealers and customers in a majority of the markets in which we sell vehicles. GM Financial faces a number of business, economic and financial risks that could impair its access to capital and negatively affect its business and operations and its ability to provide leasing and financing to retail consumers and commercial lending to our dealers to support additional sales of our vehicles. We rely on GM Financial in North America, Europe, South America and China to support leasing and sales of our vehicles to consumers requiring vehicle financing and also to provide commercial lending to our dealers. Any reduction in GM Financial's ability to provide such financial services would negatively affect our efforts to support additional sales of our vehicles and expand our market penetration among consumers and dealers.

As an entity operating in the financial services sector, GM Financial is required to comply with a wide variety of laws and regulations that may be costly to adhere to and may affect our consolidated operating results. Compliance with these laws and regulations requires that GM Financial maintain forms, processes, procedures, controls and the infrastructure to support these requirements and these laws and regulations often create operational constraints both on GM Financial抯 ability to implement servicing procedures and on pricing. Laws in the financial services industry are designed primarily for the protection of consumers. The failure to comply with these laws could result in significant statutory civil and criminal penalties, monetary damages, attorneys?fees and costs, possible revocation of licenses and damage to reputation, brand and valued customer relationships.
The primary factors that could adversely affect GM Financial's business and operations and reduce its ability to provide financing services at competitive rates include the availability of borrowings under its credit facilities to fund its retail and commercial finance activities; its ability to access a variety of financing sources including the asset-backed securities market and other secured

15


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

and unsecured debt markets; the performance of loans and leases in its portfolio, which could be materially affected by delinquencies, defaults or prepayments; wholesale auction values of used vehicles; higher than expected vehicle return rates and the residual value performance on vehicles GM Financial leases to customers; fluctuations in interest rates and currencies; and changes to regulation, supervision and licensing across various jurisdictions, including new regulations or sanctions imposed in the U.S. by the Department of Justice, SEC and Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.

Our defined benefit pension plans are currently underfunded and our pension funding requirements could increase significantly due to a reduction in funded status as a result of a variety of factors, including weak performance of financial markets, declining interest rates, changes in laws or regulations, changes in assumptions or investments that do not achieve adequate returns. Our employee benefit plans currently hold a significant amount of equity and fixed income securities. A detailed description of the investment funds and strategies is disclosed in Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements, which also describes significant concentrations of risk to the plan investments.

There are additional risks due to the complexity and magnitude of our investments. Examples include implementation of significant changes in investment policy, insufficient market liquidity in particular asset classes and the inability to quickly rebalance illiquid and long-term investments.

Our future funding requirements for our U.S. defined benefit pension plans depend upon the future performance of assets placed in trusts for these plans, the level of interest rates used to determine funding levels, the level of benefits provided for by the plans and any changes in government laws and regulations. Future funding requirements generally increase if the discount rate decreases or if actual asset returns are lower than expected asset returns, assuming other factors are held constant. Our potential funding requirements are described in Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements.

Factors which affect future funding requirements for our U.S. defined benefit plans generally affect the required funding for non-U.S. plans. Certain plans outside the U.S. do not have assets and therefore the obligation is funded as benefits are paid. If local legal authorities increase the minimum funding requirements for our non-U.S. plans, we could be required to contribute more funds.



Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments

None
ITEM 1.

BUSINESS

 

Overview

We design, develop, manufacture and sell high-performance fully electric vehicles, and energy storage systems, as well as install, operate and maintain solar and energy storage products. We are the world抯 only vertically integrated energy company, offering end-to-end clean energy products, including generation, storage and consumption. We have established a global network of vehicle stores, service centers and Supercharger stations to accelerate the widespread adoption of our products. Our vehicles, engineering expertise across multiple products and systems, intense focus to accelerate the world's transition to sustainable transport, and business model differentiates us from other manufacturers.  

We currently produce and sell two fully electric vehicles, the Model S sedan and the Model X sport utility vehicle (SUV). Both vehicles offer exceptional performance, functionality and attractive styling. We commenced deliveries of Model S in June 2012 and have continued to improve Model S by introducing performance, all-wheel drive dual motor, and autopilot options, as well as free over-the-air software updates.

We commenced deliveries of Model X in the third quarter of 2015. Model X offers exceptional safety, seating for up to seven people, all-wheel drive, and our autopilot functionality. We are currently ramping production and deliveries of Model X in the United States, Europe and Asia.  

Our next vehicle introduction is the Model 3, a lower priced sedan designed for the mass market. We intend to begin volume production and deliveries of Model 3 in the second half of 2017. We also intend to bring additional vehicles to market in the future. The production of fully electric vehicles that meets consumers?range and performance expectations requires substantial design, engineering, and integration work on almost every system of our vehicles. Our design and vehicle engineering capabilities, combined with the technical advancements of our powertrain system, have enabled us to design and develop electric vehicles that we believe overcome the design, styling, and performance issues that have historically limited broad consumer adoption of electric vehicles. As a result, our customers enjoy several benefits, including:

 

?

Long Range and Recharging Flexibility. Our vehicles offer ranges that significantly exceed those of any other commercially available electric vehicle. In addition, our vehicles incorporate our proprietary on-board charging system, permitting recharging from almost any available electrical outlet, and also offer fast charging capability from our Supercharger network.

 

?

High-Performance Without Compromised Design or Functionality. Our vehicles deliver unparalleled driving experiences with instantaneous and sustained acceleration, an advanced autopilot system with active safety and convenience features, and over-the-air software updates.

 

?

Energy Efficiency and Cost of Ownership. Our vehicles offer an attractive cost of ownership when compared to similar internal combustion engine or hybrid electric vehicles. Using only an electric powertrain enables us to create more energy efficient vehicles that are mechanically simpler than currently available hybrid or internal combustion engine vehicles. The cost to fuel our vehicles is less compared to internal combustion vehicles. We also expect our electric vehicles will have lower relative maintenance costs than other vehicles due to fewer moving parts and the absence of certain components, including oil, oil filters, spark plugs and engine valves.

We sell our vehicles through our own sales and service network which we are continuing to grow globally.  The benefits we receive from distribution ownership enable us to improve the overall customer experience, the speed of product development and the capital efficiency of our business. We are also continuing to build our network of Superchargers and destination chargers in North America, Europe and Asia to provide both fast charging that enables convenient long-distance travel as well as other convenient charging options.

In addition to manufacturing and selling our own vehicles, we leverage our technology expertise in batteries, power electronics, and integrated systems to manufacture and sell energy storage products. We recently announced the latest generation of our energy storage products, the14 kilowatt hour (kWh) Powerwall 2 with an integrated inverter for residential applications and the infinitely scalable 200 kWh Powerpack 2.  In addition, we also announced an accompanying bi-directional inverter for commercial, industrial and utility applications. We began production and deliveries of these second generation products in the fourth quarter of 2016.  Similar to our electric vehicles, our energy storage products have been developed to receive over-the-air firmware and software updates that enable additional features over time.

 

1

 

Also, through our acquisition of SolarCity Corporation, which closed on November 21, 2016, we sell renewable energy to our customers typically at prices below utility rates and are focused on reducing the cost of solar energy for our customers.  Since 2006, SolarCity has installed solar energy systems for over 325,000 customers. Our long-term agreements with our customers generate recurring payments and create a portfolio of high-quality receivables that we leverage to further reduce the cost of making the switch to solar energy.  The electricity produced by our solar installations represents a very small fraction of total U.S. electricity generation. With over tens of millions of single-family homes in our primary service territories, and many more in other locations, we have a large opportunity to expand and grow this business.

We manufacture our vehicle products primarily at our facilities in Fremont, California, Lathrop, California, Tilburg, Netherlands and at our Gigafactory 1 near Reno, Nevada. We are currently using battery packs manufactured at Gigafactory 1 for our energy storage products, and will build Model 3 battery packs and drive units at Gigafactory 1.   We manufacture our solar products at our factories in Fremont, California and Buffalo, New York (Gigafactory 2).

Our Products and Services

Vehicles

Model S

Model S is a fully electric, four-door, five-adult passenger sedan that offers compelling range and performance with zero tailpipe emissions. We offer performance and all-wheel drive dual motor system options. Model S 100D is the longest range all-electric production sedan in the world, and the performance version with the Ludicrous speed upgrade is the quickest accelerating production vehicle ever.

Model S offers a unique combination of functionality, convenience, safety and styling without compromising performance and energy efficiency.  Model S also includes premium luxury features, including a 17 inch touch screen driver interface, our advanced autopilot hardware to enable both active safety and convenience features, and over-the-air software updates. We believe the combination of performance, safety, styling, convenience and energy efficiency of Model S positions it as a compelling alternative to other vehicles in the luxury and performance segments.

Model X

Model X is the longest range all-electric production sport utility vehicle in the world, and offers exceptional functionality with high performance features such as our fully electric, all-wheel drive dual motor system and our autopilot system. . Model X can seat up to seven adults and incorporates a unique falcon wing door system for superior access to the second and third seating rows. Although the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration has not yet conducted crash testing on Model X, based on our internal testing, we are confident that Model X will receive the highest safety rating. We began customer deliveries of Model X in the third quarter of 2015 in the United States. Model X is sold in all the markets where Model S is available, including in Asia and Europe.

Model 3

We are developing a third generation electric vehicle, Model 3, which we unveiled in March 2016 and will be produced at the Tesla Factory. We intend to offer this vehicle at a lower price point and expect to produce it at far higher volumes than our Model S or Model X. Gigafactory 1 construction and Model 3 development both remain on plan to support volume Model 3 production and deliveries in the second half of 2017.

 

Future Consumer and Commercial EVs

Following the introduction of Model 3, we are also planning to introduce additional vehicles to address a broader cross-section of the consumer vehicle market, as well as introduce commercial EVs in the coming years.

Energy Storage

Using the energy management technologies and manufacturing processes developed for our vehicle powertrain systems, we developed energy storage products for use in homes, commercial facilities and utility sites. The applications for these battery systems include the provision of backup power, grid independence, peak demand reduction, demand response, reducing intermittency of renewable generation and wholesale electric market services. We began selling our residential systems in 2013 and our commercial and utility systems in 2014, and have recently commenced production of the second generation of these systems.

 

2

 

Our energy product portfolio includes systems with a wide range of applications, from use in homes to use in large grid-scale projects. Powerwall 2 is a 14 kWh rechargeable lithium-ion battery designed to store energy at a home or small commercial facility and can be used for reducing demand, self-consumption of solar power generation and as backup power. In addition, we offer a 200 kWh Powerpack system which can be used by commercial and industrial customers for peak shaving, load shifting, self-consumption of solar generation and demand response.  The Powerpack system is a fully integrated energy storage solution that can be used by utilities to smooth and firm the output of renewable power generation sources, provide dynamic energy capacity to the grid, defer or eliminate the need to upgrade transmission infrastructure and also provide for a variety of grid services for utilities. For grid-scale applications, 200 kWh battery blocks can be grouped together to offer MWh and GWh installations. We began production of the second generation of energy storage products at Gigafactory 1 in the fourth quarter of 2016.

Along with designing and manufacturing energy storage products, we continue to develop and advance our software capabilities for the control and optimal dispatch of energy storage systems across a wide range of markets and applications.

Solar Energy Systems

The major components of our solar energy systems include solar panels that convert sunlight into electrical current, inverters that convert the electrical output from the panels to a usable current compatible with the electric grid, racking that attaches the solar panels to the roof or ground, electrical hardware that connects the solar energy system to the electric grid and our monitoring device. We purchase the majority of system components from vendors, maintaining multiple sources for each major component to ensure competitive pricing and an adequate supply of materials. We also design and manufacture other system components.

Our SolarLease and SolarPPA customer agreements have fueled our growth by allowing our customers to pay little or no upfront costs to switch to distributed solar energy. Over the terms of both agreements, we own and operate the solar energy system and guarantee its performance. Our current standard SolarLeases and SolarPPAs have 20-year terms, and we typically offer the opportunity to renew our agreements. Additionally, our Solar Loan offers third-party financing alternatives to allow customers to take direct advantage of federal tax credits to reduce their electricity costs.

In October 2016, we revealed the solar roof, integrating solar energy production with aesthetically pleasing and durable glass roofing tiles, designed to complement and power customer homes and commercial buildings. We currently expect to commence production in the summer of 2017 at our Gigafactory 2 in Buffalo, New York, and begin customer installations of the solar roof later in 2017.

Technology

Vehicles

Our core competencies are powertrain engineering, vehicle engineering, innovative manufacturing and energy storage. Our core intellectual property resides not only within our electric powertrain, but also within our ability to design a vehicle that utilizes the unique advantages of an electric powertrain and the latest advancements in consumer technologies. Our powertrain consists of our battery pack, power electronics, motor, gearbox and control software. We offer several powertrain variants for the Model S and Model X that incorporate years of research and development. In addition, we have designed our vehicles to incorporate the latest advances in consumer technologies, such as mobile computing, sensing, displays, and connectivity. Further evolution of our technology continues for Model 3 and future vehicles. In addition, advancements in battery architecture, thermal management and power electronics that were originally commercialized in our vehicles, are now being leveraged in our energy storage products.

Battery Pack

We design our battery packs to achieve high energy density at a low cost while also maintaining safety, reliability and long life. Our proprietary technology includes systems for high density energy storage, cooling, safety, charge balancing, structural durability, and electronics management. We have also pioneered advanced manufacturing techniques to manufacture large volumes of battery packs with high quality and low costs.

We have significant expertise in the safety and management systems needed to use lithium-ion cells in the automotive environment, and have actively worked with lithium-ion cell suppliers to further optimize cell designs to increase overall performance. These advancements have enabled us to improve cost and performance of our batteries over time. For example, we recently upgraded the battery of our highest range Model S to 100 kWh.

 

3

 

Our engineering and manufacturing efforts have been performed with a longer-term goal of building a foundation for further development. For instance, we have designed our battery pack to permit flexibility with respect to battery cell chemistry and form factor. In so doing, we can leverage the substantial investments and advancements being made globally by battery cell manufacturers to continue to improve cost. We maintain extensive testing and R&D capabilities at the individual cell level, the full battery-pack level, and other critical battery pack systems. As a result, we have built an expansive body of knowledge on lithium-ion cell vendors, chemistry types, and performance characteristics. We believe that the flexibility of our designs, combined with our research and real-world performance data, will enable us to continue to evaluate new battery cells as they become commercially viable, and thereby optimize battery pack system performance and cost for our current and future vehicles.

Power Electronics

The power electronics in our electric vehicle powertrain govern the flow of high voltage electrical current throughout the vehicle. The power electronics have two primary functions, powering our electric motor to generate torque while driving and delivering energy into the battery pack while charging.

The first function is accomplished through the drive inverter, which converts direct current (DC) from the battery pack into alternating current (AC) to drive our induction motors. The drive inverter also provides 搑egenerative braking?functionality, which captures energy from the wheels to charge the battery pack. Tesla has developed a family of drive inverter designs that are customized to our proprietary motor designs to most efficiently meet the demands of each of our vehicles. The primary technological advantages to our designs include the ability to drive large amounts of current in a small physical package.

The second function, charging the battery pack, is accomplished by the charger, which converts alternating current (usually from a wall outlet or other electricity source) into direct current that can be accepted by the battery. Tesla vehicles can recharge on a wide variety of electricity sources due to the design of this charger, from a common household outlet to high power circuits meant for more industrial uses. Tesla vehicles come with a Universal Mobile Connector that allows for multiple different charging services to be used. We also offer a Tesla Wall Connector that can be set up to provide higher power charging than the Universal Mobile Connectors.

On the road, customers can also charge using our Supercharger network or at a variety of destinations that have deployed our charging equipment. In addition, our vehicles can charge at a variety of public charging stations around the world, either natively or through a suite of adapters. This flexibility in charging provides customers with additional mobility, while also allowing them to conveniently charge the vehicle overnight at home.

Dual Motor Powertrain

In October 2014, we launched the initial version of our dual motor powertrain, which uses two electric motors to provide greater efficiency, performance, and range in an all-wheel drive configuration. Conventional all-wheel drive vehicles distribute power to the wheels from a single engine driving a complex mechanical transmission system. By contrast, Tesla抯 dual motor powertrain digitally and independently controls torque to the front and rear wheels. The almost instantaneous response of the motors, combined with low centers of gravity, provides drivers with controlled performance and increased traction control.

Vehicle Control and Infotainment Software

The performance and safety systems of our vehicles and their battery packs require sophisticated control software. There are numerous processors in our vehicles to control these functions, and we write custom firmware for many of these processors. The flow of electricity between the battery pack and the motor must be tightly controlled in order to deliver the performance and behavior expected in an automobile. For example, software algorithms enable the vehicle to mimic the 揷reep?feeling which drivers expect from an internal combustion engine vehicle without having to apply pressure on the accelerator. Similar algorithms control traction, vehicle stability and the sustained acceleration and regenerative braking of the vehicle. Software also is used extensively to monitor the charge state of each of the cells of the battery pack and to manage all of its safety systems. Drivers use the information and control systems in our vehicles to optimize performance, customize vehicle behavior, manage charging modes and times and control all infotainment functions. We develop almost all of this software, including most of the user interfaces, internally.

 

4

 

Autopilot Systems

We have developed an expertise in vehicle autopilot systems, including auto-steering, traffic aware cruise control, lane changing, automated parking and Summon and driver warning systems. In October 2014, we began equipping all Model S vehicles with hardware to allow for the incremental introduction of autopilot technology. In October 2016, we began equipping all Tesla vehicles with hardware needed for full self-driving capability, including cameras that provide 360 degree visibility, updated ultrasonic sensors for object detection, a forward-facing radar with enhanced processing, and a powerful new onboard computer.  Our autopilot systems relieve our drivers of the most tedious and potentially dangerous aspects of road travel. Although, at present, the driver is ultimately responsible for controlling the vehicle, our system provides safety and convenience functionality that allows our customers to rely on it much like the system that airplane pilots use when conditions permit. This hardware suite, along with over-the-air firmware updates and field data feedback loops from the onboard camera, radar, ultrasonics, and GPS, enables the system to continually learn and improve its performance.  

Energy Storage

We are leveraging many of the component level technologies from our vehicles to advance our energy storage products, including high density energy storage, cooling, safety, charge balancing, structural durability, and electronics management. By taking a modular approach to the design of battery systems, we are able to maximize manufacturing capacity to produce both Powerwall and Powerpack products. Additionally, we are making significant strides in the area of bi-directional, grid-tied power electronics that enable us to interconnect our battery systems seamlessly with global electricity grids while providing fast-acting systems for power injection and absorption.

Solar Energy Systems

We are continually innovating and developing new technologies to facilitate the growth of our solar energy systems business. For example, the solar roof is being designed to work seamlessly with Tesla Powerwall 2 and we have developed proprietary software to reduce system design and installation timelines and costs.

Design and Engineering

Vehicles

In addition to the design, development and production of the powertrain, we have created significant in-house capabilities in the design and engineering of electric vehicles and their components and systems. We design and engineer bodies, chassis, interiors, heating and cooling and low voltage electrical systems in house and to a lesser extent in conjunction with our suppliers. Our team has core competencies in computer aided design and crash test simulations which reduces the product development time of new models.

Additionally, our team has expertise in lightweight materials, a very important characteristic for electric vehicles given the impact of mass on range. Model S and Model X are built with a lightweight aluminum body and chassis which incorporates a variety of materials and production methods that help optimize the weight of the vehicle.

Energy Storage

We have an in-house engineering team that both designs our energy storage products themselves, and works with our residential, commercial and utility customers to design bespoke systems incorporating our products.  Our team抯 expertise in electrical, mechanical, civil and software engineering enables us to create integrated energy storage solutions that meet the particular needs of all customer types.

Solar Energy Systems

We also have an in-house engineering team that designs a customized solar energy system for each of our customers, and which works closely with our energy storage engineering teams to integrate an energy storage system when requested by the customer. We have developed software that simplifies and expedites the design process and optimizes the design to maximize the energy production of each system. Our engineers complete a structural analysis of each building and produce a full set of structural design and electrical blueprints that contain the specifications for all system components. Additionally, we design complementary mounting and grounding hardware.

 

5

 

Sales and Marketing

Vehicles

Company-Owned Stores and Galleries

We market and sell our vehicles directly to consumers through an international network of company-owned stores and galleries which we believe enables us to better control costs of inventory, manage warranty service and pricing, maintain and strengthen the Tesla brand, and obtain rapid customer feedback. Our Tesla stores and galleries are highly visible, premium outlets in major metropolitan markets, some of which combine retail sales and service. We have also found that opening a service center in a new geographic area can increase demand. As a result, we have complemented our store strategy with sales facilities and personnel in service centers to more rapidly expand our retail footprint. We refer to these as 揝ervice Plus?locations. Including all of our stores, galleries, Service Plus and service facilities, we operated 265 locations around the world as of December 31, 2016.

Tesla Supercharger Network

We continue to build a network of fast chargers, each called a Tesla Supercharger, throughout North America, Europe, Asia and other markets to enable convenient, long-distance travel. Our Supercharger network is a strategic corporate initiative designed to provide fast charging to enable long-distance travel and remove a barrier to the broader adoption of electric vehicles caused by the perception of limited vehicle range. The Tesla Supercharger is an industrial grade, high speed charger designed to recharge a Tesla vehicle significantly more quickly than other charging options. To satisfy growing demand, Supercharger stations typically have between four and fourteen Superchargers and are strategically placed along well-travelled routes to allow Tesla vehicle owners the ability to enjoy long distance travel with convenient, minimal stops. Use of the Supercharger network is either free or requires a small fee to Supercharge. As of December 31, 2016, we had 790 Supercharger stations open worldwide and plan to continue expanding the Supercharger network.

Destination Charging

We are working with a wide variety of hospitality locations, including hotels, resorts and shopping centers, to offer an additional charging option for our customers. These destination charging partners deploy our wall connectors and provide charging to Tesla vehicle owners that patronize their businesses. As of December 31, 2016, over 4,140 locations around the world had more than 7,110 Tesla wall connectors installed.

Orders and Reservations

We typically carry a small inventory of our vehicles at our Tesla stores which are available for immediate sale. The majority of our customers, however, customize their vehicle by placing an order with us via the Internet. To begin production or make a reservation, we require an initial payment which is collected once the customer has selected the vehicle specifications and has entered into a purchase agreement. We require all remaining payment of the vehicle purchase price upon vehicle delivery to the customer.

Marketing

Historically, we have been able to generate significant media coverage of our company and our vehicles, and we believe we will continue to do so. To date, for vehicle sales, media coverage and word of mouth have been the primary drivers of our sales leads and have helped us achieve sales without traditional advertising and at relatively low marketing costs.

Energy Storage

We market and sell our energy storage products to individuals, commercial and industrial customers and utilities through a variety of channels.  Powerwall 2 appears in many of our stores and galleries worldwide, which generates interest in the product.  In the U.S., we also use our national sales organization, channel partner network and customer referral program to market and sell Powerwall 2. Outside of the U.S., we use our international sales organization and a network of channel partners to market and sell Powerwall 2.  We also sell Powerwall 2 directly to utilities who act as a channel to their end-customers.  We sell Powerpack systems to utility and commercial customers through our international sales organization, which consists of experienced power industry professionals in all of our target markets, as well as a channel partner network.  

Solar Energy Systems

We sell our solar products and services through a national sales organization that includes specialized internal call centers, outside sales force, a channel partner network and a robust customer referral program.  In the first quarter of 2017, we also began offering our solar products and services in select Tesla stores.

 

6

 

Service and Warranty

Vehicles

Service

We provide service for our electric vehicles at our company-owned service centers, at our Service Plus locations or, in certain areas for an additional charge, through Tesla Ranger mobile technicians who provide services that do not require a vehicle lift. We owned and operated 135 service locations as of December 31, 2016.

Our vehicles are designed with the capability to wirelessly upload data to us via an on-board system with cellular connectivity, allowing us to diagnose and remedy many problems before ever looking at the vehicle. When maintenance or service is required, a customer can schedule service by contacting one of our Tesla service centers. Our Tesla Rangers can also perform an array of services from the convenience of a customer抯 home or other remote location.

Our company-owned service centers enable our technicians to work closely with our engineers and research and development teams in Silicon Valley to identify problems, find solutions, and incorporate improvements faster than incumbent automobile manufacturers.

New Vehicle Limited Warranty, Maintenance and Extended Service Plans

We provide a four year or 50,000 mile New Vehicle Limited Warranty with every new vehicle, subject to separate limited warranties for the supplemental restraint system and battery and drive unit. For the battery and drive unit on our current new vehicles, we offer an eight year, infinite mile warranty, although the battery抯 charging capacity is not covered.

In addition to the New Vehicle Limited Warranty, we offer a comprehensive maintenance program for every new vehicle, which includes plans covering prepaid maintenance for up to four years or up to 50,000 miles and an Extended Service plan. The maintenance plans cover annual inspections and the replacement of wear and tear parts, excluding tires and the battery. The Extended Service plan covers the repair or replacement of vehicle parts for up to an additional four years or up to an additional 50,000 miles after the New Vehicle Limited Warranty.

Our New Vehicle Limited Warranty and Extended Service plans are subject to certain limitations, exclusions or separate warranties, including on certain wear items, such as tires, brake pads, paint and general appearance, and battery performance, and are intended to cover parts and labor to repair defects in material or workmanship in the body, chassis, suspension, interior, electronic systems, battery, powertrain and brake system. In addition, all prepaid maintenance and Extended Service plans must be purchased within a specified period of time after vehicle purchase or warranty expiration.

Energy Storage

We generally provide a ten year 搉o defect?and 揺nergy retention?warranty with every Powerwall 2 and Powerpack 2.  For Powerwall 2, the energy retention warranty involves us guaranteeing that the energy capacity of the product will be 70% or 80% (depending on the region of installation) of its nameplate capacity after 10 years of use.  For Powerpack 2, the energy retention warranty involves us guaranteeing a minimum energy capacity in each of its first 10 years of use, subject to specified throughput caps. In addition, we offer certain extended warranties, which customers are able to purchase from us at the time they purchase an energy storage system, including a 20 year extended protection plan for Powerwall 2 and a 10 or 20 year 揷apacity maintenance agreement?for Powerpack 2.  We agree to repair or replace our energy storage products in the event of a valid warranty claim.  In circumstances where we install a Powerwall 2 or Powerpack 2 system, we also provide warranties, generally ranging from one to four years, on our installation workmanship. All of the warranties for our energy storage systems are subject to customary limitations and exclusions.    

Solar Energy Systems

We generally provide warranties of between ten to 30 years on the generating and non-generating parts of the solar energy systems we sell, together with a pass-through of the inverter and module manufacturers?warranties that generally range from five to 30 years. Where we sell the electricity generated by a solar energy system, we compensate customers if their system produces less energy over a specified performance period than our guarantee. We also provide ongoing service and repair during the entire term of the customer relationship.

Financial Services

Vehicles

We offer loans and leases for our vehicles in North America, Europe and Asia primarily through various financial institutions. We also offer financing arrangements directly through our local subsidiaries in certain areas of the United States, Germany, Canada and the UK. We intend to broaden our financial services offerings during the next few years.

 

7

 

Certain of our current financing programs outside of North America provide customers with a resale value guarantee under which those customers have the option of selling their vehicle back to us at a preset future date, generally during the period of 36 to 39 months following delivery for a pre-determined resale value. In certain markets, we also offer resale value guarantees to financial institutions which may obligate us to repurchase the vehicles for a pre-determined price.

Energy Storage

Through our acquisition of SolarCity, we are able to use available financial instruments in the U.S. to offer a loan product for energy storage systems to end-customers, particularly when combined with a new solar installation to take advantage of available tax credits and incentives to reduce the cost to customer.

Solar Energy Systems

We are an industry leader in offering innovative financing alternatives that allow our customers to make the switch to solar energy with little to no upfront costs under our SolarLease and Solar PPA, or to take direct advantage of available tax credits and incentives to reduce the cost of owning a solar energy system through a SolarLoan. Our SolarLease, offers customers a fixed monthly fee at rates that typically translate into lower monthly utility bills with an electricity production guarantee. Our SolarPPA charges customers a fee per kWh based on the amount of electricity produced by our solar energy systems at rates typically lower than their local utility rate. Both our SolarLease and SolarPPA create high-quality, recurring customer payments that we monetize through financing funds we have formed with fund investors and by leveraging the value of our interests. In addition, our Solar Loan offers third-party financing directly to a qualified customer to enable the customer to purchase and own a solar energy system installed by us. We are not a party to the loan agreement between the customer and the third-party lender, and the third-party lender has no recourse against us with respect to the loan.

Manufacturing

Vehicles

We conduct vehicle manufacturing and assembly operations at our facilities in Fremont, California; Lathrop, California; and Tilburg, Netherlands. We are also building a cell and battery manufacturing facility, Gigafactory 1, outside of Reno, Nevada.

The Tesla Factory in Fremont, CA and Manufacturing Facility in Lathrop, CA

We manufacture the Model S and Model X, and certain components that are critical to our intellectual property and quality standards, at the Tesla Factory. We will also manufacture Model 3 at the Tesla Factory.  The Tesla Factory contains several manufacturing operations, including stamping, machining, casting, plastics, body assembly, paint operations, drive unit production, final vehicle assembly and end-of-line testing. In addition, we manufacture lithium-ion battery packs, electric motors, gearboxes and components for our vehicles at the Tesla Factory. Some major vehicle component systems are purchased from suppliers; however we have a high level of vertical integration in our manufacturing processes at the Tesla Factory. We machine various aluminum components at our facility in Lathrop, California and are nearing completion of a site expansion to include an aluminum castings operation.

In some areas of the Tesla Factory, we have designed our investments with flexibility to accommodate multiple products. For example, our new high volume paint shop and new stamping lines can support Model S, Model X and Model 3. Our final vehicle assembly line is producing both Model S and Model X. We also continue to make significant additional investments at the Tesla Factory to be able to start production and deliveries of Model 3, in the second half of 2017. These investments include a new body assembly shop and Model 3 final vehicle assembly.

The Netherlands

Our European headquarters and manufacturing facilities are located in Amsterdam and Tilburg. The entities through which these facilities are operated hold the rights to manufacture and distribute all Tesla products to customers in all markets outside of the United States and provide corporate oversight functions for European sales, service, and administrative functions. Our operations in Tilburg include final assembly, testing and quality control for vehicles delivered within the European Union, a parts distribution warehouse for service centers throughout Europe, a center for remanufacturing work and a customer service center.

 

8

 

Gigafactory 1 outside of Reno, Nevada

We are developing Gigafactory 1 as a facility where we work together with our suppliers to integrate battery material, cell, module and battery pack production in one location. We plan to use the battery packs manufactured at Gigafactory 1 for our vehicles, including Model 3 and energy storage products. We broke ground on Gigafactory 1 in June 2014, began assembling our energy storage products in the fourth quarter of 2015, and began production of lithium-ion battery cells for our energy storage products in the first quarter of 2017.  We also intend to manufacture Model 3 drive units at Gigafactory 1.

Gigafactory 1 is being built in phases so that Tesla, Panasonic, and other partners can begin manufacturing immediately inside the finished sections and continue to expand thereafter. Gigafactory 1 is currently expected to attain full production capacity by 2020, which is anticipated to be sufficient for the production of approximately 500,000 vehicles annually as well as for the production of our energy storage products.

We believe that Gigafactory 1 will allow us to achieve a significant reduction in the cost of our battery packs once we are in volume production with Model 3.  We have committed to invest heavily on capital expenditures for Gigafactory 1.  Panasonic has agreed to partner with us on Gigafactory 1 with investments in production equipment that it will use to manufacture and supply us with battery cells. We have agreed to prepare and provide the land, buildings and utilities, to invest in production equipment for battery module and pack production and to be responsible for the overall management of Gigafactory 1.

Supply Chain

Our vehicles use thousands of purchased parts which we source globally from hundreds of suppliers. We have developed close relationships with several key suppliers particularly in the procurement of cells and certain other key system parts. While we obtain components from multiple sources in some cases, similar to other automobile manufacturers, many of the components used in our vehicles are purchased by us from a single source. In addition, while several sources of the battery cell we have selected for our battery packs are available, we have currently fully qualified only one cell supplier for the battery packs we use in our production vehicles. We are working to fully qualify additional cells from other manufacturers.

We use various raw materials in our business including aluminum, steel, cobalt, lithium, nickel and copper. The prices for these raw materials fluctuate depending on market conditions and global demand for these materials. We believe that we have adequate supplies or sources of availability of the raw materials necessary to meet our manufacturing and supply requirements.

Energy Storage

Our energy storage products are manufactured at Gigafactory 1.  We leverage the same supply chain process and infrastructure as we use for our vehicles.  The battery architecture and many of the components used in our energy storage products are the same or similar to those used in our vehicles?battery pack, enabling us to take advantage of manufacturing efficiencies and supply chain economies of scale.  The power electronics and grid-tie inverter for the Powerwall and Powerpack systems are also manufactured at Gigafactory 1, allowing us to ship deployment-ready systems directly from Gigafactory 1.

Solar Energy Systems

We currently purchase major components such as solar panels and inverters directly from multiple manufacturers. We typically purchase solar panels and inverters on an as-needed basis from our suppliers at then-prevailing prices pursuant to purchase orders issued under our master contractual arrangements. In December 2016, we entered into a long-term agreement with Panasonic to manufacture photovoltaic (PV) cells at our Gigafactory 2 in Buffalo, New York, with negotiated pricing provisions and the intent to manufacture 1 gigawatt of solar panels annually.

Governmental Programs, Incentives and Regulations

Vehicles

California Alternative Energy and Advanced Transportation Financing Authority Tax Incentives

We have entered into multiple agreements over the past few years with the California Alternative Energy and Advanced Transportation Financing Authority (CAEATFA) that provide multi-year sales tax exclusions on purchases of manufacturing equipment that will be used for specific purposes including the expansion and ongoing development of Model S, Model X, Model 3 and future electric vehicles and expansion of electric vehicle powertrain production in California. We estimate the combined tax savings under these agreements will be approximately $198 million, of which $100 million has been realized as of December 31, 2016.

 

9

 

Nevada Tax Incentives

In connection with the construction of Gigafactory 1 in Nevada, we have entered into agreements with the State of Nevada and Storey County in Nevada that will provide abatements for sales and use taxes, real and personal property taxes, and employer excise taxes, discounts to the base tariff energy rates, and transferable tax credits. These incentives are available for the applicable periods ending on June 30, 2034, subject to capital investments by Tesla and its partners for Gigafactory 1 of at least $3.5 billion in the aggregate on or before June 30, 2024, and certain other conditions specified in the agreements. If we do not satisfy one or more conditions under the agreements, Tesla will be required to repay to the respective taxing authorities the amounts of the tax incentives incurred, plus interest.

Tesla Regulatory Credits

In connection with the production, delivery and placement into service of our zero emission vehicles, charging infrastructure and solar systems in global markets, we have earned and will continue to earn various tradable regulatory credits. We have sold these credits, and will continue to sell future credits, to automotive companies and regulated entities.  For example, under California抯 Zero-Emission Vehicle Regulation and those of states that have adopted California抯 standard, vehicle manufacturers are required to earn or purchase credits for compliance with their annual regulatory requirements. These laws provide that automakers may bank excess credits, referred to as ZEV credits, if they earn more credits than the minimum quantity required by those laws.  Manufacturers with a surplus of credits may sell their credits to other regulated parties.  Pursuant to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency抯 (EPA) national greenhouse gas (GHG) emission standards and similar standards adopted by the Canadian government, car and truck manufacturers are required to meet fleet-wide average carbon dioxide emissions standards. Manufacturers may sell excess credits to other manufacturers, who can use the credits to comply with these regulatory requirements. Many U.S. states have also adopted procurement requirements for renewable energy production.  These requirements enable companies deploying solar energy to earn tradable credits known as Solar Renewable Energy Certificates (SRECs).

Regulation梀ehicle Safety and Testing

Our vehicles are subject to, and comply with or are otherwise exempt from, numerous regulatory requirements established by NHTSA, including all applicable United States Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS). Model S and Model X fully comply with all FMVSSs without the need for any exemptions, and we expect future Tesla vehicles to also fully comply.

As a manufacturer, we must self-certify that our vehicles meet all applicable FMVSS, as well as the NHTSA bumper standard, or otherwise are exempt, before the vehicles can be imported or sold in the United States. Numerous FMVSS apply to our vehicles, such as crash-worthiness requirements, crash avoidance requirements, and electric vehicle requirements. We are also required to comply with other federal laws administered by NHTSA, including the CAFE standards, Theft Prevention Act requirements, consumer information labeling requirements, Early Warning Reporting requirements regarding warranty claims, field reports, death and injury reports and foreign recalls, and owner抯 manual requirements.

The Automobile Information and Disclosure Act requires manufacturers of motor vehicles to disclose certain information regarding the manufacturer抯 suggested retail price, optional equipment and pricing. In addition, this law allows inclusion of city and highway fuel economy ratings, as determined by EPA, as well as crash test ratings as determined by NHTSA if such tests are conducted.

Our vehicles sold in outside of the U.S. are subject to foreign safety testing regulations. Many of those regulations are different from the federal motor vehicle safety standards applicable in the United States and may require redesign and/or retesting.

Regulation桞attery Safety and Testing

Our battery pack conforms to mandatory regulations that govern transport of 揹angerous goods? defined to include lithium-ion batteries, which may present a risk in transportation. The regulations vary by mode of shipping transportation, such as by ocean vessel, rail, truck, or air. We have completed the applicable transportation tests for our battery packs, demonstrating our compliance with applicable regulations.

We use lithium metal oxide cells in our high voltage battery packs. The cells do not contain any lead, mercury, cadmium, other hazardous materials, heavy metals, or toxic materials. Our battery packs include certain packaging materials that contain trace amounts of hazardous chemicals whose use, storage, and disposal is regulated under federal law. We currently have an agreement with a third party battery recycling company to recycle our battery packs.

 

10

 

Automobile Manufacturer and Dealer Regulation

State laws regulate the manufacture, distribution, and sale of automobiles, and generally require motor vehicle manufacturers and dealers to be licensed in order to sell vehicles directly to consumers in the state. As we open additional Tesla stores and service centers, we secure dealer licenses (or their equivalent) and engage in sales activities to sell our vehicles directly to consumers. A few states, such as Michigan and Connecticut, do not permit automobile manufacturers to be licensed as dealers or to act in the capacity of a dealer, or otherwise restrict a manufacturer抯 ability to deliver or service vehicles. To sell vehicles to residents of states where we are not licensed as a dealer, we generally conduct the sale out of the state via the internet, phone or mail. In such states, we have opened 揼alleries?that serve an educational purpose and are not retail locations.

As we expand our retail footprint in the United States, some automobile dealer trade associations have both challenged the legality of our operations in court and used administrative and legislative processes to attempt to prohibit or limit our ability to operate existing stores or expand to new locations.  We expect that the dealer associations will continue to mount challenges to our business model. In addition, we expect the dealer associations to actively lobby state licensing agencies and legislators to interpret existing laws or enact new laws in ways not favorable to Tesla抯 ownership and operation of its own retail and service locations, and we intend to actively fight any such efforts to limit our ability to sell our own vehicles.

While we have analyzed the principal laws in the U.S., EU, China, Japan, UK, and Australia relating to our distribution model and believe we comply with such laws, we have not performed a complete analysis of all jurisdictions in which we may sell vehicles. Accordingly, there may be laws in certain jurisdictions that may restrict our sales and service operations.

Energy Storage

The regulatory regime for energy storage projects is still under development.  Nevertheless, there are various policies, incentives and financial mechanisms at the federal, state and local level that support the adoption of energy storage.  For example, energy storage systems that are charged using solar energy are eligible for the 30% tax credit under Section 48(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, or the IRC, as described below.  In addition, California and a number of other states have adopted procurement targets for energy storage, and behind the meter energy storage systems qualify for funding under the California Self Generation Incentive Program.

The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) has also taken steps to enable the participation of energy storage in wholesale energy markets. In 2011 and 2013, FERC removed many barriers for systems like energy storage to provide frequency regulation service, thus increasing the value these systems can obtain in wholesale energy markets. More recently, in late 2016, FERC released a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that, if it becomes a final rule, would further break down barriers preventing energy storage from fully participating in wholesale energy markets.  Finally, in January 2017, FERC issued a statement supporting the use of energy storage as both electric transmission and as electric generation concurrently, thus enabling energy storage systems to provide greater value to the electric grid.

Solar Energy Systems

Government and Utility Programs and Incentives

U.S. federal, state and local governments have established various policies, incentives and financial mechanisms to reduce the cost of solar energy and to accelerate the adoption of solar energy. These incentives include tax credits, cash grants, tax abatements and rebates.

The federal government currently provides an uncapped investment tax credit, or Federal ITC, under two sections of the IRC: Section 48 and Section 25D. Section 48(a)(3) of the IRC allows a taxpayer to claim a credit of 30% of qualified expenditures for a commercial solar energy system that commences construction by December 31, 2019. The credit then declines to 26% in 2020, 22% in 2021, and a permanent 10% thereafter. We claim the Section 48 commercial credit when available for both our residential and commercial projects, based on ownership of the solar energy system. The federal government also provides accelerated depreciation for eligible commercial solar energy systems. Section 25D of the IRC allows a homeowner-taxpayer to claim a credit of 30% of qualified expenditures for a residential solar energy system owned by the homeowner that is placed in service by December 31, 2019.The credit then declines to 26% in 2020 and 22% in 2021, and is scheduled to expire thereafter. Customers who purchase their solar energy systems for cash or through our Solar Loan are eligible to claim the Section 25D investment tax credit.

In addition to the Federal ITC, many U.S. states offer personal and corporate tax credits and incentive available for solar energy systems.

Regulation 朑eneral

We are not a 搑egulated utility?in the U.S. To operate our systems, we obtain interconnection agreements from the utilities. In almost all cases, interconnection agreements are standard form agreements that have been pre-approved by the public utility commission or other regulatory body.

 

11

 

Sales of electricity and non-sale equipment leases by third parties, such as our SolarLeases and SolarPPAs, face regulatory challenges in some states and jurisdictions.

Regulation ?Net Metering

Forty-one states, Washington, D.C. and Puerto Rico have a regulatory policy known as net energy metering, or net metering, available to new solar customers. Net metering typically allows solar customers to interconnect their on-site solar energy systems to the utility grid and offset their utility electricity purchases by receiving a bill credit for excess energy generated by their solar energy system that is exported to the grid. Each of the states where we currently serve customers has adopted a net metering policy except for Texas, where certain individual utilities have adopted net metering or a policy similar to net metering. In certain jurisdictions, regulators or utilities have reduced or eliminated the benefit available under net metering, or have proposed to do so.

Regulation ?Mandated Renewable Capacity

Many states also have adopted procurement requirements for renewable energy production, such as an enforceable renewable portfolio standard, or RPS, or other policies that require covered entities to procure a specified percentage of total electricity delivered to customers in the state from eligible renewable energy sources, such as solar energy systems. To prove compliance with such mandates, utilities typically must surrender renewable energy certificates. A solar renewable energy certificate, or SREC, is a tradable credit that represents all of the clean energy benefits of electricity generated from a solar energy system. Every time a solar energy system generates 1,000 kWh of electricity, one SREC is issued or minted by a government agency. The SREC can then be sold or traded separately from the energy produced, generally through brokers and dealers facilitating individually negotiated bilateral arrangements.

Competition

Vehicles

The worldwide automotive market, particularly for alternative fuel vehicles, is highly competitive today and we expect it will become even more so in the future as we introduce additional, lower priced vehicles such as our Model 3, and as we introduce other types of vehicles.

We believe the primary competitive factors in our markets include but are not limited to:

 

?

technological innovation;

 

?

product quality and safety;

 

?

service options;

 

?

product performance;

 

?

design and styling;

 

?

brand perception;

 

?

product price; and

 

?

manufacturing efficiency.

We believe that our vehicles compete in the market both based on their traditional segment classification as well as based on their propulsion technology. For example, Model S and Model X compete primarily in the extremely competitive premium sedan and premium SUV markets with internal combustion vehicles from more established automobile manufacturers, including Audi, BMW, Lexus and Mercedes, and Model 3 will compete with small to medium-sized sedans from manufacturers including Audi, BMW, Lexus, Mercedes, Honda and Toyota. Our vehicles also compete with vehicles propelled by alternative fuels, principally electricity.

Many established and new automobile manufacturers have entered or have announced plans to enter the alternative fuel vehicle market. Overall, we believe these announcements and vehicle introductions promote the development of the alternative fuel vehicle market by highlighting the attractiveness of alternative fuel vehicles, particularly those fueled by electricity, relative to the internal combustion vehicle. BMW, Daimler, Nissan, Fiat, Ford, General Motors and Mitsubishi, among others, have electric vehicles available today, and other current and prospective automobile manufacturers are also developing electric vehicles. Electric vehicles have also already been brought to market in China and other foreign countries and we expect a number of those manufacturers to enter the United States market as well. In addition, several manufacturers, including General Motors, Toyota, Ford, and Honda, are each selling hybrid vehicles, including plug-in versions of their hybrid vehicles.

 

12

 

Energy Storage

The market for energy storage products is also highly competitive.  Established companies, such as AES Energy Storage, LG Chem and Samsung, as well as various emerging companies, have introduced products that are similar to our product portfolio.  There are several companies providing individual components of energy storage systems (such as cells, battery modules, and power electronics) as well as others providing integrated systems.  We compete with these companies on price, energy density and efficiency.  We believe that the superior specifications of our products, our strong brand, and the modular, scalable nature of our Powerpack 2 product give us a competitive advantage when marketing our products.

Solar Energy Systems

The primary competitors to our solar energy business are the traditional local utility companies that supply energy to our potential customers. We compete with these traditional utility companies primarily based on price, predictability of price and the ease by which customers can switch to electricity generated by our solar energy systems rather than fossil fuel based alternatives.  We also compete with solar energy companies that provide products and services in distinct segments of solar energy and energy-related products. Many solar energy companies only install solar energy systems, while others only provide financing for these installations.  In the residential solar energy system installation market, our primary competitors include Vivint Solar Inc., Sunrun Inc., Trinity Solar, Sungevity, Inc., and many smaller local solar companies.

Intellectual Property

As part of our business, we seek to protect our intellectual property rights such as with respect to patents, trademarks, copyrights, trade secrets, including through employee and third party nondisclosure agreements, and other contractual arrangements. Additionally, we previously announced a patent policy in which we irrevocably pledged that we will not initiate a lawsuit against any party for infringing our patents through activity relating to electric vehicles or related equipment for so long as such party is acting in good faith. We made this pledge in order to encourage the advancement of a common, rapidly-evolving platform for electric vehicles, thereby benefiting ourselves, other companies making electric vehicles, and the world.

Segment Information

We operate as two reportable segments: automotive and energy generation and storage.

The automotive segment includes the design, development, manufacturing, and sales of electric vehicles. The energy generation and storage segment includes the design, manufacture, installation, and sale or lease of stationary energy storage products and solar energy systems to residential and commercial customers, or sale of electricity generated by our solar energy systems to customers.

Employees

As of December 31, 2016, Tesla, Inc. had 17,782 full-time employees and SolarCity Corporation had 12,243 full-time employees. To date, we have not experienced any work stoppages, and we consider our relationship with our employees to be good.

Available Information

 

We file or furnish periodic reports and amendments thereto, including our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K; proxy statements and other information with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Such reports, amendments, proxy statements and other information may be obtained by visiting the Public Reference Room of the SEC at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, D.C. 20549. Information on the operation of the Public Reference Room can be obtained by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. In addition, the SEC maintains a website (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file electronically. Our reports, amendments thereto, proxy statements and other information are also made available, free of charge, on our investor relations website at ir.tesla.com as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file or furnish such information with the SEC. The information posted on our website is not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K.

 

 

 

13

 

ITEM 1A.

RISK FACTORS

You should carefully consider the risks described below together with the other information set forth in this report, which could materially affect our business, financial condition and future results. The risks described below are not the only risks facing our company. Risks and uncertainties not currently known to us or that we currently deem to be immaterial also may materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and operating results.

Risks Related to Our Business and Industry

We have experienced in the past, and may experience in the future, significant delays or other complications in the design, manufacture, launch and production ramp of new vehicles and other products such as our energy storage products and the solar roof, which could harm our brand, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

We have experienced in the past launch, manufacturing and production ramp delays or other complications in connection with new vehicle models such as Model S and Model X, and new vehicle features such as the all-wheel drive dual motor drivetrain on Model S and the second version of autopilot hardware. For example, at times since the launch of Model X, we encountered unanticipated challenges, such as certain supply chain constraints, that forced us to decrease the production of these vehicles from our initial expectations. If unexpected issues arise or recur with respect to any of our production vehicles, we may experience further delays. In addition, because our vehicle models share certain production facilities with other models, the volume or efficiency of production with respect to one model may impact the production of other models.

We may also experience similar delays or other complications in bringing to market and ramping production of new vehicles, such as Model 3, and other products such as our energy storage products and the solar roof. Any significant additional delay or other complication in the production of our current products or the development, manufacture, launch and production ramp of our future products, including complications associated with expanding our production capacity, supply chain or regulatory approvals, could materially damage our brand, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

We may experience delays in realizing our projected timelines and cost and volume targets for the production, launch and ramp of our Model 3 vehicle, which could harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Our future business depends in large part on our ability to execute on our plans to develop, manufacture, market and sell the Model 3 vehicle, which we intend to offer at a lower price point and to produce at significantly higher volumes than our present production capabilities for the Model S or Model X vehicles. We unveiled a prototype of Model 3 in March 2016 and have announced our goal to achieve volume production and deliveries of this vehicle in the second half of 2017.

We have no experience to date in manufacturing vehicles at the high volumes that we anticipate for Model 3, and to be successful, we will need to implement efficient, automated and low-cost manufacturing capabilities, processes and supply chains necessary to support such volumes. We will also need to do extensive testing to ensure that Model 3 is in compliance with our quality standards and applicable regulations prior to beginning mass production and delivery of the vehicles. Moreover, our Model 3 production plan will also require significant investments of cash and management resources.

Our production plan for Model 3 is based on many key assumptions, including:

 

?

that we will be able to build and equip a new dedicated final assembly line for high volume production of Model 3 at the Tesla Factory without exceeding our projected costs and on our projected timeline;

 

?

that we will be able to continue to expand Gigafactory 1 in a timely manner to produce high volumes of quality lithium-ion cells and integrate such cells into finished battery packs for Model 3, all at costs that allow us to sell Model 3 at our target gross margins;

 

?

that the equipment and processes which we install for Model 3 production will be able to accurately manufacture high volumes of Model 3 vehicles within specified design tolerances and with high quality;

 

?

that we will be able to continue to engage suppliers for the necessary components on terms and conditions that are acceptable to us and that we will be able to obtain components on a timely basis and in the necessary quantities to support high volume production;

 

?

that we will be able to complete our final tooling, production planning and validation for Model 3 and the delivery of final component designs to our suppliers in a timely manner; and

 

?

that we will be able to attract, recruit, hire and train skilled employees, including employees on the production line, to operate our planned high volume production facilities to support Model 3, including at the Tesla Factory and Gigafactory 1.

 

14

 

If one or more of the foregoing assumptions turns out to be incorrect, our ability to successfully launch Model 3 on time and at volumes and prices that are profitable, as well as our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition, may be materially and adversely impacted.

We may be unable to meet our growing vehicle production and delivery plans, both of which could harm our business and prospects.

Our plans call for significant increases in vehicle production and deliveries to high volumes in a short amount of time. Our ability to achieve these plans will depend upon a number of factors, including our ability to add production lines and capacity as planned while maintaining our desired quality levels and optimize design and production changes, and our suppliers?ability to support our needs. In addition, we have used and may use in the future a number of new manufacturing technologies, techniques and processes for our vehicles, which we must successfully introduce and scale for high volume production. For example, we have introduced aluminum spot welding systems and high-speed blow forming of certain difficult to stamp vehicle parts. We have also introduced unique design features in our vehicles with different manufacturing challenges, such as a 17 inch display screen, dual motor drivetrain, autopilot hardware and falcon-wing doors. We have limited experience developing, manufacturing, selling and servicing, and allocating our available resources among, multiple products simultaneously. If we are unable to realize our plans, our brand, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results could be materially damaged.

Concurrent with the significant planned increase in our vehicle production levels, we will also need to continue to significantly increase deliveries of our vehicles. We have limited experience in delivering a high volume of vehicles, and no experience in delivering vehicles at the significantly higher volumes we anticipate for Model 3, and we may face difficulties meeting our delivery and growth plans into both existing markets as well as new markets into which we expand. If we are unable to ramp up to meet our delivery goals globally, this could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

We are dependent on our suppliers, the majority of which are single source suppliers, and the inability of these suppliers to deliver necessary components of our products in a timely manner at prices, quality levels, and volumes acceptable to us, or our inability to efficiently manage these components, could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.

Our current products contain numerous purchased parts which we source globally from hundreds of direct suppliers, the majority of whom are currently single source suppliers despite efforts to qualify and obtain components from multiple sources whenever feasible. Any significant unanticipated demand would require us to procure additional components in a short amount of time, and in the past we have also replaced certain suppliers because of their failure to provide components that met our quality control standards. While we believe that we will be able to secure additional or alternate sources of supply for most of our components in a relatively short time frame, there is no assurance that we will be able to do so or develop our own replacements for certain highly customized components of our products. Moreover, we have signed long-term agreements with Panasonic to be our manufacturing partner and supplier for lithium-ion cells at Gigafactory 1 in Nevada and PV cells and panels at Gigafactory 2 in Buffalo, New York. If we encounter unexpected difficulties with key suppliers such as Panasonic, and if we are unable to fill these needs from other suppliers, we could experience production delays and potential loss of access to important technology and parts for producing, servicing and supporting our products.

This limited supply chain exposes us to multiple potential sources of delivery failure or component shortages for the production of our products, such as those which we experienced in 2012 and 2016 in connection with our slower-than-planned Model S and Model X ramps. Furthermore, unexpected changes in business conditions, materials pricing, labor issues, wars, governmental changes, natural disasters such as the March 2011 earthquakes in Japan and other factors beyond our and our suppliers?control, could also affect our suppliers?ability to deliver components to us on a timely basis. The loss of any single or limited source supplier or the disruption in the supply of components from these suppliers could lead to product design changes and delays in product deliveries to our customers, which could hurt our relationships with our customers and result in negative publicity, damage to our brand and a material and adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Changes in our supply chain have also resulted in the past, and may result in the future, in increased cost. We have also experienced cost increases from certain of our suppliers in order to meet our quality targets and development timelines as well as due to design changes that we made, and we may experience similar cost increases in the future. Certain suppliers, including for Model X, have sought to renegotiate the terms of the supply arrangements. Additionally, we are negotiating with existing suppliers for cost reductions, seeking new and less expensive suppliers for certain parts, and attempting to redesign certain parts to make them less expensive to produce. If we are unsuccessful in our efforts to control and reduce supplier costs, our operating results will suffer. 

 

15

 

We expect the foregoing discussion to apply generally to Model 3. However, because we plan to produce Model 3 at significantly higher volumes than Model S or Model X, the negative impact of any delays or other constraints with respect to our suppliers for Model 3 could be substantially greater than any such issues experienced with respect to our products to date. As some of our suppliers for our current production vehicles do not have the resources, equipment or capability to provide components for the Model 3 in line with our requirements, we have engaged a significant number of new suppliers, and such suppliers will also have to ramp to achieve our needs in a short period of time. There is no assurance that these suppliers will ultimately be able to meet our cost, quality and volume needs. Furthermore, as the scale of our vehicle production increases, we will need to accurately forecast, purchase, warehouse and transport to our manufacturing facilities components at much higher volumes than we have experience with. If we are unable to accurately match the timing and quantities of component purchases to our actual production plans or capabilities, or successfully implement automation, inventory management and other systems to accommodate the increased complexity in our supply chain, we may have to incur unexpected storage, transportation and write-off costs, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.

Our future growth and success is dependent upon consumers?willingness to adopt electric vehicles and specifically our vehicles, especially in the mass market demographic which we are targeting with Model 3.

Our growth is highly dependent upon the adoption by consumers of alternative fuel vehicles in general and electric vehicles in particular. Although we have successfully grown demand for Model S and Model X to date and have seen very strong initial demand for Model 3, and we believe that we will be able to continue to grow demand separately for each of these vehicles and their variants, there is no guarantee of such future demand or that our vehicles will not compete with one another in the market. Moreover, the mass market demographic which we are targeting with Model 3 is larger, but more competitive, than for Model S and Model X.

If the market for electric vehicles in general and Tesla vehicles in particular does not develop as we expect, or develops more slowly than we expect, our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results could be harmed. The market for alternative fuel vehicles is relatively new, rapidly evolving, and could be affected by numerous external factors, such as:

 

?

perceptions about electric vehicle features, quality, safety, performance and cost;

 

?

perceptions about the limited range over which electric vehicles may be driven on a single battery charge;

 

?

competition, including from other types of alternative fuel vehicles, plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, and high fuel-economy internal combustion engine vehicles;

 

?

volatility in the cost of oil and gasoline;

 

?

government regulations and economic incentives; and

 

?

access to charging facilities.

Future problems or delays in expanding Gigafactory 1 and operating it in line with our expectations could negatively affect the production and profitability of our battery-based products, such as Model 3 or our energy storage products.

To lower the cost of cell production and produce cells in high volume, we intend to integrate the production of lithium-ion cells and finished battery packs for our vehicles including Model 3 and energy storage products at Gigafactory 1. While Gigafactory 1 began producing lithium-ion cells for energy storage products in January 2017, we have no other direct experience in the production of lithium-ion cells, including those intended for use in vehicles. Although we continue to remain on track with our progress at Gigafactory 1, given the size and complexity of this undertaking, it is possible that future events could result in the cost of expanding and operating Gigafactory 1 exceeding our current expectations and Gigafactory 1 taking longer to expand than we currently anticipate. In order to build our Model 3 vehicles at our planned volume and target gross margin, we must have significant battery cell production from Gigafactory 1. If we are unable to expand Gigafactory 1 in a timely manner, and attract, hire and retain a substantial number of highly skilled personnel to work there in order to produce high volumes of quality lithium-ion cells at reasonable prices, our ability to supply battery packs to our vehicles, especially Model 3, and other battery-based products according to our schedule and/or at a price that allows us to sell them at our target gross margins and in the quantities we estimate could be negatively impacted. Any such future problems or delays with Gigafactory 1 could negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

 

16

 

If our vehicles or other products that contain our vehicle powertrains or battery packs fail to perform as expected, our ability to develop, market and sell our electric vehicles could be harmed.

If our vehicles, other OEMs?vehicles that contain our powertrains or our energy storage products were to contain defects in design and manufacture that cause them not to perform as expected or that require repair, our ability to develop, market and sell our products could be harmed. For example, the operation of our vehicles is highly dependent on software, which is inherently complex and could conceivably contain defects and errors. Issues experienced by customers have included those related to the software for the 17 inch display screen, the panoramic roof and the 12 volt battery in the Model S and the seats and doors in the Model X. Although we attempt to remedy any issues we observe in our vehicles as effectively and rapidly as possible, such efforts may not be timely, may hamper production or may not be up to the satisfaction of our customers. While we have performed extensive internal testing, we currently have a limited frame of reference by which to evaluate detailed long-term quality, reliability, durability and performance characteristics of our battery packs, powertrains, vehicles and energy storage products. There can be no assurance that we will be able to detect and fix any defects in our products prior to their sale to consumers.

Any product defects or any other failure of our products to perform as expected could harm our reputation and result in delivery delays, product recalls, product liability claims, significant warranty and other expenses, and could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, operating results and prospects. Our Model X vehicles have not yet been evaluated by NHTSA for a star rating under the New Car Assessment Program, and while based on our internal testing we expect to obtain comparable ratings to those achieved by Model S, there is no assurance this will occur.

If we fail to scale our business operations and otherwise manage future growth effectively as we rapidly grow our company, especially internationally, we may not be able to produce, market, sell and service our products successfully.

Any failure to manage our growth effectively could materially and adversely affect our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. We continue to expand our operations significantly, especially internationally, including by a planned transition to high volume vehicle production and the worldwide sales and servicing of a significantly higher number of vehicles than our current vehicle fleet in the coming years, with the launch and ramp of Model 3. Furthermore, we are developing and growing our energy storage product and solar business worldwide, including in countries where we have limited or no previous operating experience in connection with our vehicle business. Our future operating results depend to a large extent on our ability to manage our expansion and growth successfully. We may not be successful in undertaking this global expansion if we are unable to control expenses and avoid cost overruns and other unexpected operating costs; establish sufficient worldwide sales, service and Supercharger facilities in a timely manner; adapt our products to meet local requirements; implement the required infrastructure, systems and processes; and find and hire a significant number of additional manufacturing, engineering, service, electrical installation, construction and administrative personnel.

If we are unable to continue to reduce the manufacturing costs of Model S and Model X or control manufacturing costs for Model 3, our financial condition and operating results will suffer.

As we have gradually ramped production of Model S and Model X, manufacturing costs per vehicle have decreased.  While we expect ongoing cost reductions to be realized by both us and our suppliers, there is no guarantee we will be able to achieve sufficient cost savings to reach our gross margin and profitability goals. We incur significant costs related to procuring the materials required to manufacture our vehicles, assembling vehicles and compensating our personnel. We may also incur substantial costs or cost overruns in increasing the production capability of our vehicle manufacturing facilities, such as for Model 3. Furthermore, if we are unable to achieve production cost targets on our Model X and Model 3 vehicles pursuant to our plans, we may not be able to meet our gross margin and other financial targets.

Furthermore, many of the factors that impact our manufacturing costs are beyond our control, such as potential increases in the costs of our materials and components, such as lithium-ion battery cells or aluminum used to produce body panels. If we are unable to continue to control and reduce our manufacturing costs, our operating results, business and prospects will be harmed.

We are significantly dependent upon revenue generated from the sale of a limited fleet of electric vehicles, which currently includes the Model S and Model X and which will also include Model 3 in the near term.

We currently generate a significant percentage of our revenues from the sale of two products: Model S and Model X vehicles. Model 3, for which we are planning to achieve volume production and deliveries in second half of 2017, requires significant investment prior to commercial introduction, and there is no guarantee that it will be commercially successful. Historically, automobile customers have come to expect a variety of vehicles offered in a manufacturer抯 fleet and new and improved vehicle models to be introduced frequently. In order to meet these expectations, we may in the future be required to introduce on a regular basis new vehicle models as well as enhanced versions of existing vehicle models. To the extent our product variety and cycles do not meet consumer expectations, our future sales may be adversely affected.

 

17

 

Our vehicles and energy storage products make use of lithium-ion battery cells, which have been observed to catch fire or vent smoke and flame, and such events have raised concerns, and future events may lead to additional concerns, about the batteries used in automotive applications.

The battery packs that we produce make use of lithium-ion cells. On rare occasions, lithium-ion cells can rapidly release the energy they contain by venting smoke and flames in a manner that can ignite nearby materials as well as other lithium-ion cells.

While we have designed the battery pack to passively contain any single cell抯 release of energy without spreading to neighboring cells, there can be no assurance that a field or testing failure of our vehicles or other battery packs that we produce will not occur, which could subject us to lawsuits, product recalls, or redesign efforts, all of which would be time consuming and expensive. Also, negative public perceptions regarding the suitability of lithium-ion cells for automotive applications or any future incident involving lithium-ion cells such as a vehicle or other fire, even if such incident does not involve our vehicles, could seriously harm our business.

In addition, we store a significant number of lithium-ion cells at the Tesla Factory and plan to produce high volumes of cells and battery modules and packs at Gigafactory 1. Any mishandling of battery cells may cause disruption to the operation of our facilities. While we have implemented safety procedures related to the handling of the cells, there can be no assurance that a safety issue or fire related to the cells would not disrupt our operations. Such damage or injury could lead to adverse publicity and potentially a safety recall. Moreover, any failure of a competitor抯 electric vehicle or energy storage product may cause indirect adverse publicity for us and our products. Such adverse publicity could negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Increases in costs, disruption of supply or shortage of materials, in particular for lithium-ion cells, could harm our business.

We may experience increases in the cost or a sustained interruption in the supply or shortage of materials. Any such increase, supply interruption or shortage could materially and negatively impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. We use various materials in our business including aluminum, steel, lithium, cobalt, nickel and copper, as well as lithium-ion cells from suppliers. The prices for these materials fluctuate, and their available supply may be unstable, depending on market conditions and global demand for these materials, including as a result of increased production of electric vehicles and energy storage products by our competitors, and could adversely affect our business and operating results. For instance, we are exposed to multiple risks relating to lithium-ion cells. These risks include:

 

?

the inability or unwillingness of current battery manufacturers to build or operate battery cell manufacturing plants to supply the numbers of lithium-ion cells we require;

 

?

disruption in the supply of cells due to quality issues or recalls by battery cell manufacturers or any issues that may arise with respect to cells manufactured at our own facilities;

 

?

an increase in the cost, or decrease in the available supply, of materials used in the cells; and

 

?

fluctuations in the value of the Japanese yen against the U.S. dollar as our battery cell purchases for Model S and Model X are currently denominated in Japanese yen. 

Our business is dependent on the continued supply of battery cells for the battery packs used in our vehicles and energy storage products. While we believe several sources of the battery cells are available for such battery packs, and expect to eventually rely substantially on battery cells manufactured at our own facilities, we have to date fully qualified only a very limited number of suppliers for the cells used in such battery packs and have very limited flexibility in changing cell suppliers. In particular, we have fully qualified only one supplier for the cells used in battery packs for our current production vehicles. Any disruption in the supply of battery cells from such suppliers could disrupt production of our vehicles and of the battery packs we produce for other automobile manufacturers until such time as a different supplier is fully qualified. Furthermore, fluctuations or shortages in petroleum and other economic conditions may cause us to experience significant increases in freight charges and material costs. Substantial increases in the prices for our materials or prices charged to us, such as those charged by battery cell suppliers, would increase our operating costs, and could reduce our margins if we cannot recoup the increased costs through increased vehicle prices. Any attempts to increase vehicle prices in response to increased material costs could result in cancellations of vehicle orders and reservations and therefore materially and adversely affect our brand, image, business, prospects and operating results.

 

18

 

We may become subject to product liability claims, which could harm our financial condition and liquidity if we are not able to successfully defend or insure against such claims.

Product liability claims could harm our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. The automobile industry in particular experiences significant product liability claims and we face inherent risk of exposure to claims in the event our vehicles do not perform as expected resulting in personal injury or death. We also may face similar claims related to any misuse or failures of new technologies that we are pioneering, including autopilot in our vehicles. Finally, as our energy storage products and solar energy systems generate and store electricity, they have the potential to cause injury to people or property. A successful product liability claim against us could require us to pay a substantial monetary award. Our risks in this area are particularly pronounced given the limited number of vehicles and energy storage products delivered to date and limited field experience of our products. Moreover, a product liability claim could generate substantial negative publicity about our products and business and could have material adverse effect on our brand, business, prospects and operating results. In most jurisdictions, we generally self-insure against the risk of product liability claims, meaning that any product liability claims will likely have to be paid from company funds, not by insurance.

The markets in which we operate are highly competitive, and we may not be successful in competing in these industries. We currently face competition from new and established domestic and international competitors and expect to face competition from others in the future, including competition from companies with new technology.

The worldwide automotive market, particularly for alternative fuel vehicles, is highly competitive today and we expect it will become even more so in the future. There is no assurance that our vehicles will be successful in the respective markets in which they compete. Many established and new automobile manufacturers such as BMW, Daimler, General Motors and Toyota, as well as other companies, have entered or are reported to have plans to enter the alternative fuel vehicle market, including hybrid, plug-in hybrid and fully electric vehicles. Most of our current and potential competitors have significantly greater financial, technical, manufacturing, marketing and other resources than we do and may be able to devote greater resources to the design, development, manufacturing, distribution, promotion, sale and support of their products. Virtually all of our competitors have more extensive customer bases and broader customer and industry relationships than we do and almost all of these companies have longer operating histories and greater name recognition than we do. Increased competition could result in lower vehicle unit sales, price reductions, revenue shortfalls, loss of customers and loss of market share, which could harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. In addition, upon the launch of our Model 3 vehicle, we will face competition from existing and future automobile manufacturers in the extremely competitive entry-level premium sedan market, including Audi, BMW, Lexus and Mercedes.

The solar and renewable energy industries are highly competitive within their markets, and also compete with large utilities. Decreases in the retail prices of electricity from the utilities or other renewable energy sources could harm our ability to offer competitive pricing and lead to an increased rate of customer defaults under our existing contracts. Moreover, solar panel prices have declined and are continuing to decline.  As we increase our solar panel manufacturing, including at Gigafactory 2, future price declines may harm our ability to compete and produce solar panels at competitive prices.

If we are unable to establish and maintain confidence in our long-term business prospects among consumers, analysts and within our industry, then our financial condition, operating results, business prospects and stock price may suffer materially.

Consumers may be less likely to purchase our products now if they are not convinced that our business will succeed or that our service and support and other operations will continue for many years. Similarly, suppliers and other third parties will be less likely to invest time and resources in developing business relationships with us if they are not convinced that our business will succeed. Accordingly, in order to build and maintain our business, we must maintain confidence among customers, suppliers, analysts and other parties in our liquidity and long-term business prospects. Maintaining such confidence may be particularly complicated by certain factors, such as our limited operating history, unfamiliarity with our products, competition and uncertainty regarding the future of electric vehicles or our other products and services and our quarterly production and sales performance compared with market expectations. Many of these factors are largely outside our control, and any negative perceptions about our long-term business prospects, even if exaggerated or unfounded, would likely harm our business and make it more difficult to raise additional funds if needed.

 

19

 

Our plan to expand our network of Tesla stores, galleries, service centers and Superchargers will require significant cash investments and management resources and may not meet expectations with respect to additional sales or installations of our products or availability of Superchargers.

Our plan to expand our network of Tesla stores, galleries, service centers and Superchargers will require significant cash investments and management resources and may not meet our expectations with respect to additional sales or installations of our products. This ongoing global expansion, which includes planned entry into markets in which we have limited or no experience selling, delivering, installing and/or servicing our products, and which may pose legal, regulatory, cultural and political challenges that we have not previously encountered, may not have the desired effect of increasing sales and installations and expanding our brand presence to the degree we are anticipating. Furthermore, the increasing number of Model S and Model X vehicles, as well as the significant increase in our vehicle fleet size that we expect from Model 3, will require us to continue to increase the number of our Supercharger stations significantly. If we fail to do so, our customers could become dissatisfied, which could adversely affect sales of our vehicles. We will also need to ensure we are in compliance with any regulatory requirements applicable to the sale, installation and service of our products, the sale of electricity generated through our solar energy systems, and operation of Superchargers in those jurisdictions, which could take considerable time and expense. If we experience any delays or cannot meet customer expectations in expanding our network of Tesla stores, galleries, service centers and Superchargers, this could lead to a decrease in sales or installations of our products and could negatively impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

We face risks associated with our international operations and expansion, including unfavorable regulatory, political, tax and labor conditions, and with establishing ourselves in new markets, all of which could harm our business.

We currently have international operations and subsidiaries in various countries and jurisdictions that are subject to legal, political, and regulatory requirements and social and economic conditions that may be very different from those affecting us domestically. Additionally, as part of our growth strategy, we will continue to expand our sales, service and Supercharger locations internationally. International expansion requires us to make significant expenditures, including the establishment of local operating entities, hiring of local employees and establishing facilities in advance of generating any revenue.

We are subject to a number of risks associated with international business activities that may increase our costs, impact our ability to sell our products and require significant management attention. These risks include conforming our products to various international regulatory and safety requirements as well as charging and other electric infrastructures, difficulty in establishing, staffing and managing foreign operations, challenges in attracting customers, foreign government taxes, regulations and permit requirements, our ability to enforce our contractual rights; trade restrictions, customs regulations, tariffs and price or exchange controls, and preferences of foreign nations for domestically manufactured products.

If we fail to effectively grow and manage the residual, financing and credit risks related to our vehicle financing programs, our business may suffer.

We offer vehicle financing arrangements through our local subsidiaries in the United States, Canada, Germany and the UK, including leasing directly through certain of those subsidiaries. The profitability of the leasing program depends on our ability to accurately project residual values, secure adequate financing and/or business partners to fund and grow this program, and screen for and manage customer credit risk.  We expect the need for leasing and other financing options to be significantly higher with the volumes we expect for our vehicles in the future, especially Model 3, for which we also expect a higher proportion of uptake for such programs than for Model S or Model X. If we are unable to adequately fund our leasing program with internal funds, or partners or other external financing sources, and compelling alternative financing programs are not available for our customers, we may be unable to grow our sales. Furthermore, if our leasing business grows substantially, our business may suffer if we cannot effectively manage the greater levels of residual and credit risks resulting from growth. Finally, if we do not successfully monitor and comply with applicable national, state and/or local financial regulations and consumer protection laws governing lease transactions, we may become subject to enforcement actions or penalties, either of which may harm our business.

Our resale value guarantee and leasing programs for our vehicles expose us to the risk that the resale values of vehicles returned to us are lower than our estimates and may result in lower revenues, gross margin, profitability and liquidity.

We have provided resale value guarantees to many of our customers, under which such customers may sell their vehicles back to us at certain points in time at pre-determined resale values. Customers can lease our vehicles through both leasing partners and from us directly, through our captive finance companies. The resale values of any vehicles resold or returned to us pursuant to these programs may be lower than our estimates, which are based on a limited secondary market for our vehicles. If we incorrectly estimate the residual values of our vehicles, or the volume of vehicles returned to us is higher than our estimates and/or we are not able to resell them timely or at all, our profitability and/or liquidity could be negatively impacted. In cases where customers retain their vehicles past the guarantee period, our gross margin will be negatively impacted as all remaining revenues and costs related to the vehicle will be recognized at no gross profit.

 

20

 

We apply lease accounting on sales of vehicles with a resale value guarantee and on leases made directly by us or by our leasing partners. Under lease accounting, we recognize the associated revenues and costs of the vehicle sale over time rather than fully upfront at vehicle delivery. As a result, these programs generate lower revenues in the period the car is delivered and higher gross margins during the period of the resale value guarantee as compared to purchases in which the resale value guarantee does not apply. A higher than anticipated prevalence of these programs could therefore have an adverse impact on our near term revenues and operating results. Moreover, unlike the sale of a vehicle with a resale value guarantee or programs with leasing partners which do not impact our cash flows and liquidity at the time of vehicle delivery, under a lease held directly by us, we may receive only a very small portion of the total vehicle purchase price at the time of lease, followed by a stream of payments over the term of the lease. To the extent we expand our leasing program without securing external financing or business partners to support such expansion, our cash flow and liquidity could also be negatively impacted.

The unavailability, reduction or elimination of, or unfavorable determinations with respect to, government and economic incentives in the United States and abroad supporting the development and adoption of electric vehicles or solar energy could have some impact on demand for our products and services.

We currently benefit from certain government and economic incentives supporting the development and adoption of electric vehicles. In the United States and abroad, such incentives include, among other things, tax credits or rebates that encourage the purchase of electric vehicles. In Norway, for example, the purchase of electric vehicles is not currently subject to import taxes, taxes on non-recurring vehicle fees, the 25% value added tax or the purchase taxes that apply to the purchase of gas-powered vehicles. Notably, the quantum of incentive programs promoting electric vehicles is a tiny fraction of the amount of incentives that are provided to gas-powered vehicles through the oil and gas industries.  Nevertheless, even the limited benefits from such programs could be reduced, eliminated or exhausted.  For example, on January 1, 2016, a previously available incentive in Denmark that favored the purchase of electric vehicles expired and was replaced with a newly phased-in incentive that is less generous than the incentive that it replaced. Moreover, under current regulations, a $7,500 federal tax credit available in the United States for the purchase of qualified electric vehicles with at least 17 kWh of battery capacity, such as our vehicles, will begin to phase out with respect to any vehicles delivered in the second calendar quarter following the quarter in which we deliver our 200,000th qualifying vehicle in the United States. In addition, California implemented regulations phasing out a $2,500 cash rebate on qualified electric vehicles for high-income consumers, which became effective in March 2016. In certain circumstances, there is pressure from the oil and gas lobby or related special interests to bring about such developments, which could have some negative impact on demand for our vehicles.

In addition, certain governmental rebates, tax credits and other financial incentives that are currently available with respect to our solar and energy storage product businesses allow us to lower our installation costs, cost of capital and encourage investors to invest in our solar financing funds. However, these incentives may expire on a particular date, end when the allocated funding is exhausted or be reduced or terminated as solar energy adoption rates increase, often without warning. For example, the federal government currently offers a 30% investment tax credit (揑TC? for the installation of solar power facilities and if installed concurrently, for energy storage systems, which are currently scheduled to decline to 10%, and expire altogether for residential systems, by January 2022. Likewise, in jurisdictions where net energy metering is currently available, our customers receive bill credits from utilities for energy that their solar energy systems generate and export to the grid in excess of the electric load they use. Several jurisdictions have reduced or eliminated the benefit available under net energy metering, or have proposed to do so. Such reductions in or termination of governmental incentives could adversely impact our results of operations by increasing our cost of capital, making us less competitive for potential customers, and adversely impact our ability to attract investment partners and to form new financing funds for our solar assets.

Moreover, we and our fund investors claim the ITC in amounts based on the fair market value of our solar energy systems. Although we obtain independent appraisals to support the claimed fair market values, the relevant governmental authorities have audited such values and in certain cases have determined that they should be lower, and they may do so in the future. Such determinations may result in adverse tax consequences and/or our obligation to make indemnification or other payments, or contribute additional assets, to our funds or fund investors.

If we are unable to integrate SolarCity successfully into our business, we may not realize the anticipated benefits of our acquisition of SolarCity.

We have devoted to date, and continue to devote, substantial attention and resources to integrating into our company the business and operations of SolarCity, which we acquired in November 2016. Our company has no prior experience integrating a business of the size and scale of SolarCity. If the integration process takes longer than expected or is more costly than expected, we may fail to realize some or all of the anticipated benefits of the acquisition.

 

21

 

Potential difficulties we may encounter in the integration process include the following:

 

?

the inability to successfully combine our business with that of SolarCity in a manner that permits the combined company to achieve the synergies we expect from the acquisition, which would result in the anticipated benefits of the acquisition not being realized partly or wholly in the time frame currently anticipated or at all;

 

?

complexities associated with managing the combined businesses;

 

?

integrating personnel from the two companies;

 

?

creation of uniform standards, controls, procedures, policies and information systems; and

 

?

potential unknown liabilities and unforeseen increased expenses, delays or regulatory conditions associated with the acquisition.

Any failure by us to realize the expected benefits of our substantial investments and commitments with respect to the manufacture of PV cells, including if we are unable to comply with the terms of our agreement with the Research Foundation for the State University of New York relating to our Gigafactory 2, could result in negative consequences for our business.

As part of our acquisition of SolarCity, we acquired certain PV cell manufacturing and technology assets, and a build-to-suit lease arrangement with the Research Foundation for the State University of New York (the 揊oundation?. This agreement with the Foundation provides for the construction of Gigafactory 2 in Buffalo, New York, which at full capacity we expect will be capable of producing 1 gigawatt of PV cells, including for our solar roof. Under this agreement, we are obligated to, among other things, employ specified minimum numbers of personnel in the State of New York during the 10-year period following the arrival of manufacturing equipment, the receipt of certain permits and other specified items at Gigafactory 2, and spend or incur approximately $5 billion in combined capital, operational expenses, costs of goods sold and other costs in the State of New York during the 10-year period following the achievement of full production output at Gigafactory 2. If we fail in any year over the course of the term of the agreement to meet these obligations, we would be obligated to pay a 損rogram payment?of $41.2 million to the Foundation in such year. Any inability on our part to comply with the requirements of this agreement may result in the payment of significant amounts to the Foundation, the termination of our lease at Gigafactory 2, and/or the need to secure an alternative supply of PV cells for products such as our solar roof. Moreover, if we are unable to utilize the other manufacturing and technology assets that were acquired in the SolarCity acquisition in accordance with our expectations, we may have to recognize accounting charges pertaining to the write-off of such assets. Any of the foregoing events could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

We are exposed to fluctuations in currency exchange rates, which could negatively affect our financial results.

Our revenues and costs denominated in foreign currencies are not completely matched. As we have increased Model S deliveries in markets outside of the United States, we have much higher revenues than costs denominated in other currencies such as the euro, Chinese yuan, Norwegian kroner, British pound and Canadian dollar. Any strengthening of the U.S. dollar would tend to reduce our revenues as measured in U.S. dollars, as we have historically experienced. In addition, a portion of our costs and expenses have been, and we anticipate will continue to be, denominated in foreign currencies, including the Japanese yen. If we do not have fully offsetting revenues in these currencies and if the value of the U.S. dollar depreciates significantly against these currencies, our costs as measured in U.S. dollars as a percent of our revenues will correspondingly increase and our margins will suffer. Moreover, while we undertake limited hedging activities intended to offset the impact of currency translation exposure, it is impossible to predict or eliminate such impact. As a result, our operating results could be adversely affected.

If we are unable to attract and/or retain key employees and hire qualified personnel, our ability to compete could be harmed.

The loss of the services of any of our key employees could disrupt our operations, delay the development and introduction of our vehicles and services, and negatively impact our business, prospects and operating results. In particular, we are highly dependent on the services of Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer, and Jeffrey B. Straubel, our Chief Technical Officer.

None of our key employees is bound by an employment agreement for any specific term and we may not be able to successfully attract and retain senior leadership necessary to grow our business. Our future success depends upon our ability to attract and retain executive officers and other key technology, sales, marketing, engineering, manufacturing and support personnel and any failure to do so could adversely impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

 

22

 

Key talent may leave Tesla due to various factors, such as a very competitive labor market for talented individuals with automotive experience. Currently in California, there is increasing competition for talented individuals with the specialized knowledge of electric vehicles, software engineers, manufacturing engineers and other skilled employees. This competition affects both our ability to retain key employees and hire new ones. Our continued success depends upon our continued ability to hire new employees in a timely manner, especially to support our expansion plans and ramp to high-volume manufacture of vehicles, and retain current employees. Additionally, we compete with both mature and prosperous companies that have far greater financial resources than we do and start-ups and emerging companies that promise short-term growth opportunities. Difficulties in retaining current employees or recruiting new ones could have an adverse effect on our performance.

We are highly dependent on the services of Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer.

We are highly dependent on the services of Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer, Chairman of our Board of Directors and largest stockholder. Although Mr. Musk spends significant time with Tesla and is highly active in our management, he does not devote his full time and attention to Tesla. Among other commitments, Mr. Musk also currently serves as Chief Executive Officer and Chief Technical Officer of Space Exploration Technologies, a developer and manufacturer of space launch vehicles.

We are subject to various environmental and safety laws and regulations that could impose substantial costs upon us and negatively impact our ability to operate our manufacturing facilities.

As a manufacturing company, including with respect to facilities such as the Tesla Factory, Gigafactory 1 and Gigafactory 2, we are subject to complex environmental, health and safety laws and regulations at numerous jurisdictional levels in the United States and abroad, including laws relating to the use, handling, storage, disposal and human exposure to hazardous materials. The costs of compliance, including remediating contamination if any is found on our properties and any changes to our operations mandated by new or amended laws, may be significant. We may also face unexpected delays in obtaining permits and approvals required by such laws in connection with our manufacturing facilities, which would hinder our operation of these facilities. Such costs and delays may adversely impact our business prospects and operating results. Furthermore, any violations of these laws may result in substantial fines and penalties, remediation costs, third party damages, or a suspension or cessation of our operations.

Our business may be adversely affected by any disruptions caused by union activities.

It is common for employees at companies with significant manufacturing operations such as us to belong to a union, which can result in higher employee costs and increased risk of work stoppages. Moreover, regulations in some jurisdictions outside of the United States mandate employee participation in industrial collective bargaining agreements and work councils with certain consultation rights with respect to the relevant companies?operations. Although we work diligently to provide the best possible work environment for our employees, they may still decide to join or seek recognition to form a labor union, or we may be required to become a union signatory. Furthermore, we are directly or indirectly dependent upon companies with unionized work forces, such as parts suppliers and trucking and freight companies, and work stoppages or strikes organized by such unions could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition or operating results. If a work stoppage occurs, it could delay the manufacture and sale of our products and have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, operating results or financial condition.

Our products and services are subject to substantial regulations, which are evolving, and unfavorable changes or failure by us to comply with these regulations could substantially harm our business and operating results.

Motor vehicles are subject to substantial regulation under international, federal, state, and local laws. We incur significant costs in complying with these regulations, and may be required to incur additional costs to comply with any changes to such regulations. We are subject to laws and regulations applicable to the import, sale and service of automobiles internationally. For example, in countries outside of the United States, we are required to meet vehicle-specific safety standards that are often materially different from requirements in the United States, thus resulting in additional investment into the vehicles and systems to ensure regulatory compliance in those countries. This process may include official review and certification of our vehicles by foreign regulatory agencies prior to market entry, as well as compliance with foreign reporting and recall management systems requirements.

Additionally, our vehicles are equipped with a range of autopilot features that assist drivers, relieving them of certain tedious and potentially dangerous aspects of road travel. Autopilot is a recently-introduced feature with which domestic and foreign regulators have limited experience. Any current or future proposed regulations in this area, if passed, could impact whether and how our customers are able to use our vehicles equipped for autopilot, and which, depending on the severity of the regulations, could adversely affect our business.

 

23

 

Moreover, as a provider of electricity generated by the solar energy systems we install for customers, we are impacted by federal, state and local regulations and policies concerning electricity pricing, the interconnection of customer-generated electricity with the electric grid, and the sale of electricity generated by third-party owned systems. For example, existing or proposed regulations and policies would permit utilities to limit the amount of electricity generated by our customers with their solar energy systems, charge fees and penalties to our customers relating to the purchase of energy other than from the grid, adjust electricity rate designs such that the price of our solar products may not be competitive with that of electricity from the grid, restrict us and our customers from transacting under our power purchase agreements or qualifying for government incentives and benefits that apply to solar power, and limit or eliminate net energy metering. If such regulations and policies remain in effect or are adopted in other jurisdictions, or if other regulations and policies that facilitate the connection of our solar energy systems to the grid are modified or eliminated, they could deter potential customers from purchasing our solar products, threaten the economics of our existing contracts and cause us to cease solar energy system sales and operations in the relevant jurisdictions, which could harm our business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations.

We are subject to various privacy and consumer protection laws.

Our privacy policy is posted on our website, and any failure by us or our vendor or other business partners to comply with it or with federal, state or international privacy, data protection or security laws or regulations could result in regulatory or litigation-related actions against us, legal liability, fines, damages and other costs. We may also incur substantial expenses and costs in connection with maintaining compliance with such laws, in particular data protection laws in the EU, which are currently in a state of transition. Although we take steps to protect the security of our customers?personal information, we may be required to expend significant resources to comply with data breach requirements if third parties improperly obtain and use the personal information of our customers or we otherwise experience a data loss with respect to customers?personal information. A major breach of our network security and systems could have negative consequences for our business and future prospects, including possible fines, penalties and damages, reduced customer demand for our vehicles, and harm to our reputation and brand.

We may be compelled to undertake product recalls or take other actions, which could adversely affect our brand image and financial performance.

Any product recall in the future may result in adverse publicity, damage our brand and adversely affect our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. For example, we initiated a Model S recall in November 2015 after we discovered a single field unit with a front seat belt issue, and a Model X recall in April 2016 after an internal test revealed unintended movement in the third row seats during a collision.  None of our past recalls have been related to our electric powertrain. In the future, we may at various times, voluntarily or involuntarily, initiate a recall if any of our products or our electric vehicle powertrain components that we provide to other vehicle OEMs, including any systems or parts sourced from our suppliers, prove to be defective or noncompliant with applicable laws and regulations, such as federal motor vehicle safety standards. Such recalls, whether voluntary or involuntary or caused by systems or components engineered or manufactured by us or our suppliers, could involve significant expense and could adversely affect our brand image in our target markets, as well as our business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations.

Our current and future warranty reserves may be insufficient to cover future warranty claims which could adversely affect our financial performance.

Subject to separate limited warranties for the supplemental restraint system, battery and drive unit, we provide four year or 50,000 mile limited warranties for the purchasers of new Model S and Model X vehicles and pre-owned Model S vehicles certified and sold by us. The limited warranty for the battery and drive unit covers the drive unit for eight years, as well as the battery for a period of eight years (or for certain older vehicles, 125,000 miles if reached sooner than eight years), although the battery抯 charging capacity is not covered under any of our warranties or Extended Service plans. In addition, customers of new Model S and Model X vehicles have the opportunity to purchase an Extended Service plan for the period after the end of the limited warranty for their new vehicles to cover additional services for up to an additional four years or 50,000 miles, provided it is purchased within a specified period of time.

For energy storage products, we provide limited warranties against defects and to guarantee certain levels of minimum energy retention. For example, we guarantee that each Powerwall 2 product will maintain at least 70-80% of its stated capacity after 10 years, and that each Powerpack 2 product will retain specified minimum energy capacities in each of its first 10 years of use (subject to stated throughput caps). We also offer extended warranties for periods of up to 20 years at additional cost at the time of purchase, including a 揷apacity maintenance agreement?available for the Powerpack 2, as well as workmanship warranties and system availability guarantees to customers who elect to have us install their systems or perform preventative maintenance services, respectively.  

 

24

 

Finally, customers who buy energy from us under solar energy system leases or power purchase agreements are covered by warranties equal to the length of the agreement term, which is typically 20 years. Systems purchased for cash are covered by a warranty of up to 10 years, with extended warranties available at additional cost. In addition, we pass through to our customers the inverter and panel manufacturers?warranties, which generally range from 5 to 25 years, subjecting us to the risk that the manufacturers may later cease operations or fail to honor their underlying warranties. Finally, we provide a performance guarantee with our leased solar energy systems that compensates a customer on an annual basis if their system does not meet the electricity production guarantees set forth in their lease.

If our warranty reserves are inadequate to cover future warranty claims on our products, our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results could be materially and adversely affected. Warranty reserves include management抯 best estimate of the projected costs to repair or to replace items under warranty. These estimates are based on actual claims incurred to-date and an estimate of the nature, frequency and costs of future claims. Such estimates are inherently uncertain and changes to our historical or projected experience, especially with respect to products such as Model 3 that are new and/or that we expect to produce at significantly greater volumes than our past products, may cause material changes to our warranty reserves in the future.

We are currently expanding and improving our information technology systems and use security measures designed to protect our systems against breaches and cyber-attacks. If these efforts are not successful, our business and operations could be disrupted and our operating results and reputation could be harmed.

We are currently expanding and improving our information technology systems, including implementing new internally developed systems, to assist us in the management of our business. In particular, our volume production of multiple vehicles necessitates continued development, maintenance and improvement of our information technology systems in the United States and abroad, which include product data management, procurement, inventory management, production planning and execution, sales, service and logistics, dealer management, financial, tax and regulatory compliance systems. The implementation, maintenance and improvement of these systems require significant management time, support and cost. Moreover, there are inherent risks associated with developing, improving and expanding our core systems as well as implementing new systems, including the disruption of our data management, procurement, manufacturing execution, finance, supply chain and sales and service processes. These risks may affect our ability to manage our data and inventory, procure parts or supplies or manufacture, sell, deliver and service vehicles, or achieve and maintain compliance with, or realize available benefits under, tax laws and other applicable regulations. We also maintain information technology measures designed to protect us against system security risks, data breaches and cyber-attacks.

We cannot be sure that these systems or their required functionality will be effectively implemented, maintained or expanded as planned. If we do not successfully implement, maintain or expand these systems as planned, our operations may be disrupted, our ability to accurately and/or timely report our financial results could be impaired, and deficiencies may arise in our internal control over financial reporting, which may impact our ability to certify our financial results. Moreover, our proprietary information could be compromised and our reputation may be adversely affected. If these systems or their functionality do not operate as we expect them to, we may be required to expend significant resources to make corrections or find alternative sources for performing these functions.

Our insurance strategy may not be adequate to protect us from all business risks.

We may be subject, in the ordinary course of business, to losses resulting from products liability, accidents, acts of God and other claims against us, for which we may have no insurance coverage. While we currently maintain general liability, automobile, property, workers?compensation, and directors?and officers?insurance policies, as a general matter, we do not maintain as much insurance coverage as many other companies do, and in some cases, we do not maintain any at all. Additionally, the policies that we do have may include significant deductibles, and we cannot be certain that our insurance coverage will be sufficient to cover all future claims against us. A loss that is uninsured or which exceeds policy limits may require us to pay substantial amounts, which could adversely affect our financial condition and operating results.

Our financial results may vary significantly from period-to-period due to fluctuations in our operating costs.

We expect our period-to-period financial results to vary based on our operating costs which we anticipate will increase significantly in future periods as we, among other things, design, develop and manufacture Model 3, energy storage and solar products and other future products, increase the production capacity at our manufacturing facilities to produce vehicles at higher volumes, including ramping up the production of Model S and Model X, expand Gigafactory 1, open new Tesla stores and service centers with maintenance and repair capabilities, open new Supercharger locations, develop Gigafactory 2, increase our sales and marketing activities, and increase our general and administrative functions to support our growing operations. As a result of these factors, we believe that quarter-to-quarter comparisons of our financial results, especially in the short-term, are not necessarily meaningful and that these comparisons cannot be relied upon as indicators of future performance. Moreover, our financial results may not meet expectations of equity research analysts or investors. If any of this occurs, the trading price of our stock could fall substantially, either suddenly or over time.

 

25

 

Any unauthorized control or manipulation of our vehicles?systems could result in loss of confidence in us and our vehicles and harm our business.

Our vehicles contain complex information technology systems. For example, our vehicles are designed with built-in data connectivity to accept and install periodic remote updates from us to improve or update the functionality of our vehicles. We have designed, implemented and tested security measures intended to prevent unauthorized access to our information technology networks, our vehicles and their systems. However, hackers have reportedly attempted, and may attempt in the future, to gain unauthorized access to modify, alter and use such networks, vehicles and systems to gain control of, or to change, our vehicles?functionality, user interface and performance characteristics, or to gain access to data stored in or generated by the vehicle. We encourage reporting of potential vulnerabilities in the security of our vehicles via our security vulnerability reporting policy, and we aim to remedy any reported and verified vulnerabilities. Accordingly, we have received reports of potential vulnerabilities in the past and have attempted to remedy them. However, there can be no assurance that vulnerabilities will not be identified in the future, or that our remediation efforts are or will be successful.

Any unauthorized access to or control of our vehicles or their systems or any loss of data could result in legal claims or proceedings. In addition, regardless of their veracity, reports of unauthorized access to our vehicles, their systems or data, as well as other factors that may result in the perception that our vehicles, their systems or data are capable of being 揾acked,?could negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. We have been the subject of such reports in the past.

Servicing our indebtedness requires a significant amount of cash, and we may not have sufficient cash flow from our business to pay our substantial indebtedness.  

As of December 31, 2016, we had outstanding in aggregate principal amounts $205 million of the 2018 Notes, $920 million of the 2019 Notes and $1.38 billion of the 2021 Notes (collectively, the 揟esla Convertible Notes?.  In addition, we have established a senior secured asset based revolving credit agreement (the 揅redit Agreement? that allows us to borrow, under certain circumstances, up to $1.2 billion.  As of December 31, 2016, we had $969 million in borrowings under the credit facility pursuant to the Credit Agreement. We are also party to a warehouse credit facility with lender commitments of $600 million (the 揥arehouse Facility?, of which we had borrowed $390 million as of December 31, 2016. Moreover, as of December 31, 2016, our subsidiary SolarCity Corporation, together with its subsidiaries, had total outstanding indebtedness of $3.6 billion, including under its credit facilities (the 揝olarCity Credit Facilities?. Such outstanding indebtedness included $364 million drawn under a secured revolving credit facility with lender commitments of $418.5 million as of December 31, 2016 (including commitments expiring as of such date), which matures in December 2017, as well as $230 million in aggregate principal amount of 2.75% convertible senior notes due 2018, $566 million in aggregate principal amount of 1.625% convertible senior notes due 2019 and $113 million in aggregate principal amount of zero coupon convertible senior notes due 2020 (collectively, the 揝olarCity Convertible Notes?. Our substantial consolidated indebtedness may increase our vulnerability to any generally adverse economic and industry conditions, and we and our subsidiaries may, subject to the limitations in the terms of our existing and future indebtedness, incur additional debt, secure existing or future debt or recapitalize our debt.

Pursuant to their terms, holders may convert their Tesla Convertible Notes at their option prior to the scheduled maturities of the respective Tesla Convertible Notes under certain circumstances. The 2018 Notes have been convertible at their holders?option during each quarter commencing with the fourth quarter of 2013, except the first quarter of 2014. Upon conversion of the applicable Tesla Convertible Notes, we will be obligated to make cash payments in respect of the principal amounts thereof, and we may also have to deliver cash and/or shares of our common stock, in respect of the conversion value in excess of such principal amounts on such Tesla Convertible Notes. For example, as of December 31, 2016, we have repaid in cash approximately $455 million in aggregate principal amount of the 2018 Notes due to early conversions. The SolarCity Convertible Notes are also currently convertible into shares of our common stock at conversion prices ranging from $300.00 to $759.36 per share.  In addition, holders of the Tesla Convertible Notes and the SolarCity Convertible Notes will have the right to require us to repurchase their notes upon the occurrence of a fundamental change at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the fundamental change purchase date.

 

26

 

Our ability to make scheduled payments of the principal and interest on our indebtedness when due or to make payments upon conversion or repurchase demands with respect to our convertible notes, or to refinance our indebtedness as we may need or desire, depends on our future performance, which is subject to economic, financial, competitive and other factors beyond our control. Our business may not continue to generate cash flow from operations in the future sufficient to satisfy our obligations under our existing indebtedness, and any future indebtedness we may incur, and to make necessary capital expenditures. If we are unable to generate such cash flow, we may be required to adopt one or more alternatives, such as reducing or delaying investments or capital expenditures, selling assets, refinancing or obtaining additional equity capital on terms that may be onerous or highly dilutive. Our ability to refinance existing or future indebtedness will depend on the capital markets and our financial condition at such time. In addition, our ability to make payments may be limited by law, by regulatory authority or by agreements governing our future indebtedness. We may not be able to engage in any of these activities or engage in these activities on desirable terms or at all, which could result in a default on our existing or future indebtedness and have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.

Our debt agreements contain covenant restrictions that may limit our ability to operate our business.

The terms of our Credit Facility and/or certain of the SolarCity Credit Facilities contain, and any of our other future debt agreements may contain, covenant restrictions that limit our ability to operate our business, including restrictions on our ability to, among other things, incur additional debt or issue guarantees, create liens, repurchase stock or make other restricted payments, and make certain voluntary prepayments of specified debt. In addition, under certain circumstances we are required to comply with a fixed charge coverage ratio. As a result of these covenants, our ability to respond to changes in business and economic conditions and engage in beneficial transactions, including to obtain additional financing as needed, may be restricted. Furthermore, our failure to comply with our debt covenants could result in a default under our debt agreements, which could permit the holders to accelerate our obligation to repay the debt. If any of our debt is accelerated, we may not have sufficient funds available to repay it.

The classification of our convertible notes may have an effect on our reported financial results.

Our 2018 Notes and the SolarCity Convertible Notes have been historically, and our 2019 Notes and 2021 Notes may become in the future, convertible at the option of their holders prior to their scheduled terms under certain circumstances. Even if holders do not elect to convert their convertible notes, if such notes become convertible prior to their scheduled maturity dates, we would be required to reclassify such notes and the related debt issuance costs as current liabilities and certain portions of our equity outside of equity to mezzanine equity, which would have an adverse impact on our reported financial results for such quarter, and could have an adverse impact on the market price of our common stock.

We may need or want to raise additional funds and these funds may not be available to us when we need them. If we cannot raise additional funds when we need or want them, our operations and prospects could be negatively affected.

The design, manufacture, sale, installation and/or servicing of automobiles, energy storage products and solar products is a capital intensive business. Until we are consistently generating positive free cash flows, we may need or want to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity, equity-related or debt securities or through obtaining credit from financial institutions to fund, together with our principal sources of liquidity, the costs of developing and manufacturing our current or future vehicles, energy storage products and/or solar products, to pay any significant unplanned or accelerated expenses or for new significant strategic investments, or to refinance our significant consolidated indebtedness, even if not required to do so by the terms of such indebtedness. We need sufficient capital to fund our ongoing operations, continue research and development projects, establish sales and service centers, build and deploy Superchargers, expand Gigafactory 1, develop Gigafactory 2 and to make the investments in tooling and manufacturing capital required to introduce new vehicles, energy storage products and solar products. We cannot be certain that additional funds will be available to us on favorable terms when required, or at all. If we cannot raise additional funds when we need them, our financial condition, results of operations, business and prospects could be materially and adversely affected.

Additionally, we use capital from third-party fund investors to reduce the cost of capital of our solar energy system installations, improve our margins, offset future reductions in government incentives and maintain the price competitiveness of our solar energy systems. The availability of this tax-advantaged financing depends upon many factors, including the confidence of the investors in the solar energy industry and the quality and mix of our customer contracts, any regulatory changes impacting the economics of our existing customer contracts, changes in legal and tax advantages or risks or government incentives associated with these financings, and our ability to compete with other renewable energy companies for the limited number of potential fund investors. Moreover, interest rates are at historically low levels. If the rate of return required by investors rises as a result of a rise in interest rates, it will reduce the present value of the customer payment streams underlying, and therefore the total value of, our financing structures, increasing our cost of capital. If we are unable to establish new financing funds on favorable terms for third-party ownership arrangements to enable our customers?access to our solar energy systems with little or no upfront cost, we may be unable to finance installation of our customers?systems, or our cost of capital could increase and our liquidity may be negatively impacted, any of which would have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.  

 

27

 

We may face regulatory limitations on our ability to sell vehicles directly which could materially and adversely affect our ability to sell our electric vehicles.

We sell our vehicles directly to consumers. We may not be able to sell our vehicles through this sales model in each state in the United States as some states have laws that may be interpreted to impose limitations on this direct-to-consumer sales model. In certain states in which we are not able to obtain dealer licenses, we have opened galleries, which are not full retail locations.

The application of these state laws to our operations continues to be difficult to predict. Laws in some states have limited our ability to obtain dealer licenses from state motor vehicle regulators and may continue to do so.

In addition, decisions by regulators permitting us to sell vehicles may be subject to challenges by dealer associations and others as to whether such decisions comply with applicable state motor vehicle industry laws. We have prevailed in many of these lawsuits and such results have reinforced our continuing belief that state laws were not designed to prevent our distribution model. In some states, there have also been regulatory and legislative efforts by vehicle dealer associations to propose bills and regulations that, if enacted, would prevent us from obtaining dealer licenses in their states given our current sales model. A few states have passed legislation that clarifies our ability to operate, but at the same time limits the number of dealer licenses we can obtain or stores that we can operate. We have also filed a lawsuit in federal court in Michigan challenging the constitutionality of the state抯 prohibition on direct sales as applied to our business.

Internationally, there may be laws in jurisdictions we have not yet entered or laws we are unaware of in jurisdictions we have entered that may restrict our sales or other business practices. Even for those jurisdictions we have analyzed, the laws in this area can be complex, difficult to interpret and may change over time.

We may need to defend ourselves against intellectual property infringement claims, which may be time-consuming and could cause us to incur substantial costs.

Others, including our competitors, may hold or obtain patents, copyrights, trademarks or other proprietary rights that could prevent, limit or interfere with our ability to make, use, develop, sell or market our products and services, which could make it more difficult for us to operate our business. From time to time, the holders of such intellectual property rights may assert their rights and urge us to take licenses, and/or may bring suits alleging infringement or misappropriation of such rights. We may consider the entering into licensing agreements with respect to such rights, although no assurance can be given that such licenses can be obtained on acceptable terms or that litigation will not occur, and such licenses could significantly increase our operating expenses.  In addition, if we are determined to have infringed upon a third party抯 intellectual property rights, we may be required to cease making, selling or incorporating certain components or intellectual property into the goods and services we offer, to pay substantial damages and/or license royalties, to redesign our products and services, and/or to establish and maintain alternative branding for our products and services. In the event that we were required to take one or more such actions, our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition could be materially adversely affected. In addition, any litigation or claims, whether or not valid, could result in substantial costs, negative publicity and diversion of resources and management attention.

Our facilities or operations could be damaged or adversely affected as a result of disasters.

Our corporate headquarters, the Tesla Factory and Gigafactory 1 are located in seismically active regions in Northern California and Nevada. If major disasters such as earthquakes or other events occur, or our information system or communications network breaks down or operates improperly, our headquarters and production facilities may be seriously damaged, or we may have to stop or delay production and shipment of our products. We may incur expenses relating to such damages, which could have a material adverse impact on our business, operating results and financial condition.

Risks Related to the Ownership of our Common Stock

The trading price of our common stock is likely to continue to be volatile.

The trading price of our common stock has been highly volatile and could continue to be subject to wide fluctuations in response to various factors, some of which are beyond our control. Our common stock has experienced an intra-day trading high of $287.39 per share and a low of $178.19 per share over the last 52 weeks. The stock market in general, and the market for technology companies in particular, has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations that have often been unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of those companies. Broad market and industry factors may seriously affect the market price of companies?stock, including ours, regardless of actual operating performance. In addition, in the past, following periods of volatility in the overall market and the market price of a particular company抯 securities, securities class action litigation has often been instituted against these companies. For example, a shareholder litigation like this was filed against us in 2013. While the plaintiffs?complaint was dismissed with prejudice, any future shareholder litigation could result in substantial costs and a diversion of our management抯 attention and resources.

 

28

 

We may fail to meet our publicly announced guidance or other expectations about our business, which could cause our stock price to decline.

We occasionally provide guidance regarding our expected financial and business performance, such as projections regarding sales and production, as well as anticipated future revenues, gross margins, profitability and cash flows. Correctly identifying key factors affecting business conditions and predicting future events is inherently an uncertain process and our guidance may not ultimately be accurate. Our guidance is based on certain assumptions such as those relating to anticipated production and sales volumes and average sales prices, supplier and commodity costs, and planned cost reductions. If our guidance is not accurate or varies from actual results due to our inability to meet our assumptions or the impact on our financial performance that could occur as a result of various risks and uncertainties, the market value of our common stock could decline significantly.

Transactions relating to our convertible notes may dilute the ownership interest of existing stockholders, or may otherwise depress the price of our common stock.

The conversion of some or all of the Tesla Convertible Notes or the SolarCity Convertible Notes would dilute the ownership interests of existing stockholders to the extent we deliver shares upon conversion of any of such notes. Our 2018 Notes and the SolarCity Convertible Notes have been historically, and the other Tesla Convertible Notes may become in the future, convertible at the option of their holders prior to their scheduled terms under certain circumstances. If holders elect to convert their convertible notes, we could be required to deliver to them a significant number of shares of our common stock. Any sales in the public market of the common stock issuable upon such conversion could adversely affect prevailing market prices of our common stock. In addition, the existence of the convertible notes may encourage short selling by market participants because the conversion of such notes could be used to satisfy short positions, or anticipated conversion of such notes into shares of our common stock could depress the price of our common stock.

Moreover, in connection with each issuance of the Tesla Convertible Notes, we entered into convertible note hedge transactions, which are expected to reduce the potential dilution and/or offset potential cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount upon conversion of the applicable Tesla Convertible Notes. We also entered into warrant transactions with the hedge counterparties, which could separately have a dilutive effect on our common stock to the extent that the market price per share of our common stock exceeds the applicable strike price of the warrants on the applicable expiration dates. In addition, the hedge counterparties or their affiliates may enter into various transactions with respect to their hedge positions, which could also cause or prevent an increase or a decrease in the market price of our common stock or the convertible notes.

Elon Musk has pledged shares of our common stock to secure certain bank borrowings. If Mr. Musk were forced to sell these shares pursuant to a margin call that he could not avoid or satisfy, such sales could cause our stock price to decline.

Certain banking institutions have made extensions of credit to Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer, a portion of which was used to purchase shares of common stock in certain of our public offerings and private placements at the same prices offered to third party participants in such offerings and placements. We are not a party to these loans, which are partially secured by pledges of a portion of the Tesla common stock currently owned by Mr. Musk. If the price of our common stock were to decline substantially and Mr. Musk were unable to avoid or satisfy a margin call with respect to his pledged shares, Mr. Musk may be forced by one or more of the banking institutions to sell shares of Tesla common stock in order to remain within the margin limitations imposed under the terms of his loans. Any such sales could cause the price of our common stock to decline further.

Anti-takeover provisions contained in our governing documents, applicable laws and our convertible notes could impair a takeover attempt.

Our certificate of incorporation and bylaws afford certain rights and powers to our board of directors that could contribute to the delay or prevention of an acquisition that it deems undesirable. We are also subject to Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law and other provisions of Delaware law that limit the ability of stockholders in certain situations to effect certain business combinations. In addition, the terms of our convertible notes require us to repurchase such notes in the event of a fundamental change, including a takeover of our company. Any of the foregoing provisions and terms that has the effect of delaying or deterring a change in control could limit the opportunity for our stockholders to receive a premium for their shares of our common stock, and could also affect the price that some investors are willing to pay for our common stock.

 

 

ITEM 1B.

UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS

None.3.D RISK FACTORS

Industry and Business Risks

The worldwide automotive market is highly competitive.

The worldwide automotive market is highly competitive. Toyota faces intense competition from automotive manufacturers in the markets in which it operates. Although the global economy continues to recover gradually, competition in the automotive industry has further intensified amidst difficult overall market conditions. In addition, competition is likely to further intensify in light of further continuing globalization in the worldwide automotive industry, possibly resulting in industry reorganizations. Factors affecting competition include product quality and features, safety, reliability, fuel economy, the amount of time required for innovation and development, pricing, customer service and financing terms. Increased competition may lead to lower vehicle unit sales, which may result in a further downward price pressure and adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. Toyota’s ability to adequately respond to the recent rapid changes in the automotive market and to maintain its competitiveness will be fundamental to its future success in existing and new markets and to maintain its market share. There can be no assurances that Toyota will be able to compete successfully in the future.

The worldwide automotive industry is highly volatile.

Each of the markets in which Toyota competes has been subject to considerable volatility in demand. Demand for vehicles depends to a large extent on economic, social and political conditions in a given market and the introduction of new vehicles and technologies. As Toyota’s revenues are derived from sales in markets worldwide, economic conditions in such markets are particularly important to Toyota.

Reviewing the general economic environment for the fiscal year ended March 2016, with respect to the world economy, the U.S. economy has seen ongoing recovery mainly due to steady progress of personal consumption, and the European economy has seen a moderate recovery in the eurozone. Meanwhile, weaknesses have been seen in China and other Asian emerging countries. The Japanese economy has been on a moderate recovery as a whole, while weakness could be seen in personal consumption and other areas. For the automobile industry, although markets have progressed in a steady manner, especially in the U.S., markets in some emerging countries have become stagnant, and the Japanese market has slowed down mainly in the sales of mini-vehicles due to the tax increase.

The shifts in demand for automobiles are continuing, and it is unclear how this situation will transition in the future. Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected if the shifts in demand for automobiles continues or progresses further. Demand may also be affected by factors directly impacting vehicle price or the cost of purchasing and operating vehicles such as sales and financing incentives, prices of raw materials and parts and components, cost of fuel and governmental regulations (including tariffs, import regulation and other taxes). Volatility in demand may lead to lower vehicle unit sales, which may result in downward price pressure and adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s future success depends on its ability to offer new, innovative and competitively priced products that meet customer demand on a timely basis.

Meeting customer demand by introducing attractive new vehicles and reducing the amount of time required for product development are critical to automotive manufacturers. In particular, it is critical to meet customer demand with respect to quality, safety and reliability. The timely introduction of new vehicle models, at competitive prices, meeting rapidly changing customer preferences and demand is more fundamental to Toyota’s success than ever, as the automotive market is rapidly transforming in light of the changing global economy.

 

5

Table of Contents
There is no assurance, however, that Toyota will adequately and appropriately respond to changing customer preferences and demand with respect to quality, safety, reliability, styling and other features in a timely manner. Even if Toyota succeeds in perceiving customer preferences and demand, there is no assurance that Toyota will be capable of developing and manufacturing new, price competitive products in a timely manner with its available technology, intellectual property, sources of raw materials and parts and components, and production capacity, including cost reduction capacity. Further, there is no assurance that Toyota will be able to implement capital expenditures at the level and times planned by management. Toyota’s inability to develop and offer products that meet customers’ preferences and demand with respect to quality, safety, reliability, styling and other features in a timely manner could result in a lower market share and reduced sales volumes and margins, and may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s ability to market and distribute effectively is an integral part of Toyota’s successful sales.

Toyota’s success in the sale of vehicles depends on its ability to market and distribute effectively based on distribution networks and sales techniques tailored to the needs of its customers. There is no assurance that Toyota will be able to develop sales techniques and distribution networks that effectively adapt to changing customer preferences or changes in the regulatory environment in the major markets in which it operates. Toyota’s inability to maintain well-developed sales techniques and distribution networks may result in decreased sales and market share and may adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s success is significantly impacted by its ability to maintain and develop its brand image.

In the highly competitive automotive industry, it is critical to maintain and develop a brand image. In order to maintain and develop a brand image, it is necessary to further increase customers’ confidence by providing safe, high-quality products that meet customer preferences and demand. If Toyota is unable to effectively maintain and develop its brand image as a result of its inability to provide safe, high-quality products or as a result of the failure to promptly implement safety measures such as recalls when necessary, vehicle unit sales and/or sale prices may decrease, and as a result revenues and profits may not increase as expected or may decrease, adversely affecting its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota relies on suppliers for the provision of certain supplies including parts, components and raw materials.

Toyota purchases supplies including parts, components and raw materials from a number of external suppliers located around the world. For some supplies, Toyota relies on a single supplier or a limited number of suppliers, whose replacement with another supplier may be difficult. Inability to obtain supplies from a single or limited source supplier may result in difficulty obtaining supplies and may restrict Toyota’s ability to produce vehicles. Furthermore, even if Toyota were to rely on a large number of suppliers, first-tier suppliers with whom Toyota directly transacts may in turn rely on a single second-tier supplier or limited second-tier suppliers. Toyota’s ability to continue to obtain supplies from its suppliers in a timely and cost-effective manner is subject to a number of factors, some of which are not within Toyota’s control. These factors include the ability of Toyota’s suppliers to provide a continued source of supply, and Toyota’s ability to effectively compete and obtain competitive prices from suppliers. A loss of any single or limited source supplier or inability to obtain supplies from suppliers in a timely and cost-effective manner could lead to increased costs or delays or suspensions in Toyota’s production and deliveries, which could have an adverse effect on Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

The worldwide financial services industry is highly competitive.

The worldwide financial services industry is highly competitive. Increased competition in automobile financing may lead to decreased margins. A decline in Toyota’s vehicle unit sales, an increase in residual value risk due to lower used vehicle price, an increase in the ratio of credit losses and increased funding costs are factors which may impact Toyota’s financial services operations. If Toyota is unable to adequately respond to the changes and competition in automobile financing, Toyota’s financial services operations may adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations.

 

6

Table of Contents
Toyota’s operations and vehicles rely on various digital and information technologies.

Toyota depends on various information technology networks and systems, some of which are managed by third parties, to process, transmit and store electronic information, including sensitive data, and to manage or support a variety of business processes and activities, including manufacturing, research and development, supply chain management, sales and accounting. In addition, Toyota’s vehicles may rely on various digital and information technologies, including information service and driving assistance functions. Despite security measures, Toyota’s digital and information technology networks and systems may be vulnerable to damage, disruptions or shutdowns due to attacks by hackers, computer viruses, breaches due to unauthorized use, errors or malfeasance by employees and others who have or gain access to the networks and systems Toyota depends on, service failures or bankruptcy of third parties such as software development or cloud computing vendors, power shortages and outages, and utility failures or other catastrophic events like natural disasters. Such incidents could materially disrupt critical operations, disclose sensitive data, interfere with information services and driving assistance functions in Toyota’s vehicles, and/or give rise to legal claims or proceedings, liability or regulatory penalties under applicable laws, which could have an adverse effect on Toyota’s brand image and its financial condition and results of operations.

Financial Market and Economic Risks

Toyota’s operations are subject to currency and interest rate fluctuations.

Toyota is sensitive to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and is principally exposed to fluctuations in the value of the Japanese yen, the U.S. dollar and the euro and, to a lesser extent, the Australian dollar, the Russian ruble, the Canadian dollar and the British pound. Toyota’s consolidated financial statements, which are presented in Japanese yen, are affected by foreign currency exchange fluctuations through translation risk, and changes in foreign currency exchange rates may also affect the price of products sold and materials purchased by Toyota in foreign currencies through transaction risk. In particular, strengthening of the Japanese yen against the U.S. dollar can have an adverse effect on Toyota’s operating results.

Toyota believes that its use of certain derivative financial instruments including foreign exchange forward contracts and interest rate swaps and increased localized production of its products have reduced, but not eliminated, the effects of interest rate and foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. Nonetheless, a negative impact resulting from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and changes in interest rates may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. For a further discussion of currency and interest rate fluctuations and the use of derivative financial instruments, see “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects — Operating Results — Overview — Currency Fluctuations,” “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk,” and notes 21 and 22 to Toyota’s consolidated financial statements.

High prices of raw materials and strong pressure on Toyota’s suppliers could negatively impact Toyota’s profitability.

Increases in prices for raw materials that Toyota and Toyota’s suppliers use in manufacturing their products or parts and components such as steel, precious metals, non-ferrous alloys including aluminum, and plastic parts, may lead to higher production costs for parts and components. This could, in turn, negatively impact Toyota’s future profitability because Toyota may not be able to pass all those costs on to its customers or require its suppliers to absorb such costs.

A downturn in the financial markets could adversely affect Toyota’s ability to raise capital.

Should the world economy suddenly deteriorate, a number of financial institutions and investors will face difficulties in providing capital to the financial markets at levels corresponding to their own financial capacity, and, as a result, there is a risk that companies may not be able to raise capital under terms that they would expect to receive with their creditworthiness. If Toyota is unable to raise the necessary capital under appropriate conditions on a timely basis, Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected.

 

7

Table of Contents
Political, Regulatory, Legal and Other Risks

The automotive industry is subject to various governmental regulations.

The worldwide automotive industry is subject to various laws and governmental regulations including those related to vehicle safety and environmental matters such as emission levels, fuel economy, noise and pollution. In particular, automotive manufacturers such as Toyota are required to implement safety measures such as recalls for vehicles that do not or may not comply with the safety standards of laws and governmental regulations. In addition, Toyota may, in order to reassure its customers of the safety of Toyota’s vehicles, decide to voluntarily implement recalls or other safety measures even if the vehicle complies with the safety standards of relevant laws and governmental regulations. Many governments also impose tariffs and other trade barriers, taxes and levies, or enact price or exchange controls. Toyota has incurred, and expects to incur in the future, significant costs in complying with these regulations. If Toyota launches products that result in safety measures such as recalls, Toyota may incur various costs including significant costs for free repairs. Furthermore, new legislation or changes in existing legislation may also subject Toyota to additional expenses in the future. If Toyota incurs significant costs related to implementing safety measures or meeting laws and governmental regulations, Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected.

Toyota may become subject to various legal proceedings.

As an automotive manufacturer, Toyota may become subject to legal proceedings in respect of various issues, including product liability and infringement of intellectual property. Toyota may also be subject to legal proceedings brought by its shareholders and governmental proceedings and investigations. Toyota is in fact currently subject to a number of pending legal proceedings and government investigations. A negative outcome in one or more of these pending legal proceedings could adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. For a further discussion of governmental regulations, see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Governmental Regulation, Environmental and Safety Standards” and for legal proceedings, please see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Legal Proceedings.”

Toyota may be adversely affected by natural calamities, political and economic instability, fuel shortages or interruptions in social infrastructure, wars, terrorism and labor strikes.

Toyota is subject to various risks associated with conducting business worldwide. These risks include natural calamities; political and economic instability; fuel shortages; interruption in social infrastructure including energy supply, transportation systems, gas, water, or communication systems resulting from natural hazards or technological hazards; wars; terrorism; labor strikes and work stoppages. Should the major markets in which Toyota purchases materials, parts and components and supplies for the manufacture of Toyota products or in which Toyota’s products are produced, distributed or sold be affected by any of these events, it may result in disruptions and delays in the operations of Toyota’s business. Should significant or prolonged disruptions or delays related to Toyota’s business operations occur, it may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.The Worldwide Automotive Market

Toyota estimates that annual worldwide vehicle sales totaled approximately 91 million units in 2015.

Automobile sales are affected by a number of factors including:

 

 	•	 	
social, political and economic conditions;

 

 	•	 	
introduction of new vehicles and technologies; and

 

 	•	 	
costs incurred by customers to purchase and operate automobiles.

These factors can cause consumer demand to vary substantially from year to year in different geographic markets and in individual categories of automobiles.

In fiscal 2016, the U.S. economy experienced steady growth, with Europe undergoing gradual recovery following additional monetary easing measures while the economy in Japan lacked strength as the improvement in the jobs market did not impact income and consumption remained low. Growth in emerging markets slowed due to weakness of local currencies deriving partly from a downturn in the Chinese economy, as well as a decline in prices of natural resources in resource-producing countries.

The automotive industry was also impacted by this trend. In 2015, with respect to developed countries, markets in Europe and the United States expanded. In addition, in Japan, market demand decreased despite a recovery in general consumption levels and signs of recovery from the consumption tax increase in April 2014. In emerging markets, the expansion of the Chinese market continued, but markets in other emerging countries contracted.

However, in the medium- to long-term, Toyota expects the automotive market to grow driven principally by the growth in emerging markets. Global competition is expected to be severe, as competition in compact and low-price vehicles intensifies, and technological development and development of new products become more frequent with a heightened global awareness of the environment and more stringent fuel economy standards.

In 2015, China, North America, Europe and Asia were the world’s largest automotive markets. The share of each market across the globe, which Toyota estimates based on the available automobile sales data in each country and region information, was 28% for China, 23% for North America (22% excluding Mexico and Puerto Rico), 21% for Europe and 10% for Asia. In China, new vehicle sales increased to approximately 25.0 million units. In North America, new vehicle sales increased to approximately 20.8 million units. In Europe, new vehicle sales increased to approximately 19.0 million units. In Asia (including India but excluding Japan and China), new vehicle unit sales increased from the previous year to approximately 9.3 million units.

The worldwide automotive industry is affected significantly by government regulations aimed at reducing harmful effects on the environment, enhancing vehicle safety and improving fuel economy. These regulations have added to the cost of manufacturing vehicles. Many governments also mandate local procurement of parts and components and impose tariffs and other trade barriers and price or exchange controls as a means of creating jobs, protecting domestic producers or influencing their balance of payments. Changes in regulatory requirements and other government-imposed restrictions can limit an automaker’s operations. These regulations can also make it difficult to repatriate profits to an automaker’s home country.

The development of the worldwide automotive market includes the continuing globalization of automotive operations. Manufacturers seek to achieve globalization by localizing the design and manufacture of automobiles and their parts and components in the markets in which they are sold. By expanding production capabilities beyond their home markets, automotive manufacturers are able to reduce their exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates as well as to trade restrictions and tariffs.

 

10

Table of Contents
Recently, there have been many global business alliances and investments entered into between manufacturers in the global automotive industry. There are various reasons behind these transactions including the need to respond to the excessive global capacity in the production of automobiles, the need to reduce costs and improve efficiency by increasing the number of automobiles produced using common vehicle platforms and by sharing research and development expenses for environmental and other technology, the desire to expand a company’s global presence through increased size and the desire to expand into particular segments or geographic markets.

Toyota believes that its research and development initiatives, particularly the development of environmentally friendly new vehicle technologies, vehicle safety and information technology, provide it with a strategic advantage.

Toyota’s ability to compete in the global automotive industry will depend in part on Toyota’s successful implementation of its business strategy. This is subject to a number of factors, some of which are not in Toyota’s control. These factors are discussed in “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects” and elsewhere in this annual report.

Toyota Global Vision

In March 2011, Toyota unveiled its “Toyota Global Vision” corporate outline for the future, which serves not only to give direction to Toyota employees around the world, but also to convey such direction to customers and to the public at large. Toyota will work to achieve sustained growth through the realization of the following ideals which are parts of the Vision:

“The safest and most responsible ways of moving people”

 

 	•	 	
Safety is Toyota’s highest priority, and Toyota will continue to provide world-class safety.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will also continue to contribute to environmental quality and to human happiness by using leading environmental technology and by deploying that technology in a growing line of vehicle models. At the same time, Toyota will work through the provision of products, sales and services that exceed customer expectation to offer a rewarding experience for customers.

“Enriching lives around the world”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota has been consistently true to its founding spirit of serving society through conscientious manufacturing, and it will continue working in that spirit to contribute to enhance the quality of life wherever it has operations.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will strive to continue contributing to economic vitality wherever it has operations by generating stable employment and by participating in mutually beneficial business relationships with dealers and suppliers. It will also strive to continue to actively engage in initiatives for human resources development and the promotion of cultural activities of its host communities.

“Lead the way to the future of mobility”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will lead the industry in technological development that will spawn next-generation mobility. For example, it will explore possibilities in personal mobility and in the convergence of information technology for automobiles and “smart grids” for optimizing energy generation and consumption. Toyota will strive to offer products and services that match the needs in each market.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will strive to advance environmental technology and develop low-carbon technologies and technologies for maximizing safety through interaction with the transport infrastructure to lay a foundation for sustainable and amenable future mobility.

 

11

Table of Contents
“Our commitment to quality, constant innovation”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota is committed to providing quality vehicles that are highly reliable and driven with a sense of safety and reliability.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will constantly reinvent itself and continue to engage in cutting-edge technology development. Toyota will work towards offering vehicles around the world that address the needs of today and of tomorrow at affordable prices.

“Continued awareness for the Earth and environment”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will continue to work towards minimizing environmental impact in its manufacturing and other operations, and products.

 

 	•	 	
With an emphasis on environmental awareness, Toyota will in its operations work towards energy conservation, reduction in carbon dioxide emission, efficient use of resources such as recycling, and human resource development and production methods that allow for coexistence with nature.

“Exceed expectations and be rewarded with a smile”

 

 	•	 	
Everyone at Toyota will continuously maintain a sense of gratitude to customers and will strive to earn smiles with products and services that are stimulating and inspiring and exceed customer expectations.

“There is always a better way”

 

 	•	 	
All Toyota employees will share the recognition that there is always a better way and share a commitment to continuous improvement, which are fundamental to The Toyota Way.

“Meet challenging goals by engaging the talent and passion of people”

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will nurture a corporate culture where teamwork and individual creativity thrive and where people will approach their work with pride and passion.

 

 	•	 	
Toyota will honor the spirit of diversity in recruiting, training and promoting capable individuals around the world. Human resources development at Toyota will continue to promote the transfer of the company’s monozukuri spirit of conscientious manufacturing and related skills and know-how from one generation to the next.

As for the future business environment, the U.S. is expected to continue recovering and Europe, chiefly in the eurozone, is expected to continue its moderate recovery. Meanwhile, China and other emerging countries are showing a risk of a slowdown. With regards to the Japanese economy, attention needs to be paid to an economic decline caused by a slowdown in emerging countries.

The automotive market is expected to progress steadily in developed countries, though concerns over slowdowns in emerging countries continue. In addition, measures to respond to environmental and fuel consumption regulations in various countries and to reinforce efforts toward the development of safety technologies are required, while companies in other businesses are newly venturing into the development of automated driving technology. Fierce competition is thus intensifying on a global scale.

In this severe business environment, Toyota intends to steadily progress toward the realization of the Toyota Global Vision through sustainable growth based on the following policies:

First, Toyota intends to contribute to the realization of a future mobility society through pioneering technologies, products and businesses. Toyota will develop human resources who will foresee the future and courageously take on new challenges.

 

12

Table of Contents
Second, Toyota intends to reinforce true competitiveness in order to grow as steadily as a tree adding annual growth rings. Toyota will thoroughly improve quality, establish new working methods to sincerely engage with “customers and cars,” and enhance its crisis management abilities for responding to crises of every type.

In order to realize the above vision, Toyota reorganized its corporate structure in April 2016 to establish a three-part structure: product-based in-house companies, region-based business units, and the head office. At the product-based in-house companies, streamlined operation from planning through manufacturing enables quick and independent decision-making. Within the region-based business units, Toyota aims to build even more regional operations. The head office will work to formulate a medium- to long-term vision and management strategy, including an appropriate allocation of resources, with an eye toward the future.

Based on these initiatives, Toyota will contribute to “enriching lives of communities” by providing “ever-better cars.” This is expected to encourage more customers to purchase Toyota cars and thereby lead to the establishment of a stable business base. By perpetuating this cycle, Toyota will aim to realize sustainable growth and enhance corporate value. In addition, through full observance of corporate ethics such as compliance with applicable laws and regulations, Toyota will fulfill its social responsibilities.

Toyota Environmental Challenge 2050

Positioning responding to environmental issues as one of the most prioritized challenges for management, Toyota has tackled head-on activities such as the development and promotion of next-generation vehicles including hybrid vehicles and fuel cell vehicles, efficient production that puts less of a burden on the environment, the recycling of end-of-life vehicles and hybrid vehicle batteries, planting trees for the coexistence of humans and nature in harmony, and conservation of ecosystems.

However, in recent years, the seriousness of environmental issues is increasing over a wide area, as evidenced by global warming, water shortages, resource depletion, and degradation of biodiversity. In response to the situation, Toyota believes it is necessary to take on new challenges that consider the world 20 or 30 years in the future, in order to remain closely aligned with the global environment. Accordingly, Toyota announced Toyota Environmental Challenge 2050 in October 2015.

With the aims of reducing the environmental impact of vehicles as much as possible as well as moving toward a net positive impact, by 2050 in order to contribute to the realization of a sustainable society, the Toyota Environmental Challenge 2050 has set forth the following six challenges for Toyota to address.

 

 	1.	New Vehicles Zero CO2 Emissions Challenge
 

 	2.	Life Cycle Zero CO2 Emissions Challenge
 

 	3.	Plant Zero CO2 Emissions Challenge
 

 	4.	Challenge of Minimizing and Optimizing Water Usage
 

 	5.	Challenge of Establishing a Recycling-Based Society and Systems
 

 	6.	Challenge of Establishing a Future Society in Harmony with Nature
Further strengthening collaboration with the Toyota group and all other stakeholders, Toyota will consolidate new ideas, dynamism and technology to tackle together the realization of a truly sustainable society from a long-term perspective.

Automotive Operations

Toyota’s revenues from its automotive operations were ¥25,977.4 billion in fiscal 2016, ¥25,062.1 billion in fiscal 2015 and ¥23,781.4 billion in fiscal 2014.

 

13

Table of Contents
Toyota produces and sells passenger vehicles, minivans and commercial vehicles such as trucks. Toyota Motor Corporation’s subsidiary, Daihatsu Motor Co., Ltd. (“Daihatsu”), produces and sells mini-vehicles and compact cars. Hino Motors, Ltd. (“Hino”), also a subsidiary of Toyota Motor Corporation, produces and sells commercial vehicles such as trucks and buses. Toyota also manufactures automotive parts, components and accessories for its own use and for sale to others.

On January 29, 2016, Toyota and Daihatsu announced that, with an aim to strengthen competitiveness in the small car segment, they entered into a share exchange agreement to make Daihatsu a wholly-owned subsidiary of Toyota as of August 1, 2016. Under a joint strategy, Toyota and Daihatsu will be able to plan and implement optimal strategies including combining their technical expertise and bases of operations, joint development of next-generation technology, bold cost reduction and expansion of product lineups with a global brand strategy. Daihatsu will play a key role in developing globally competitive small cars of both brands based on the technology Daihatsu has developed through manufacturing of mini-vehicles.

Vehicle Models

Toyota’s vehicles (produced by Toyota, Daihatsu and Hino) can be classified into three categories: hybrid vehicles, conventional engine vehicles, and fuel cell vehicles. Toyota’s product line-up includes subcompact and compact cars, mini-vehicles, mid-size, luxury, sports and specialty cars, recreational and sport-utility vehicles, pickup trucks, minivans, trucks and buses.

Hybrid Vehicles

The world’s first mass-produced hybrid car was Toyota’s Prius. It runs on an efficient combination of a gasoline engine and motor. This system allows the Prius to travel more efficiently than conventional engine vehicles of comparable size and performance. The hybrid design of the Prius also results in the output of 75% less emission than the maximum amount allowed by Japanese environmental regulations. Toyota views the Prius as the cornerstone of its emphasis on designing and producing eco-friendly automobiles.

In the last three years, Toyota has strengthened its hybrid lineup by introducing the fully remodeled IS300h in May 2013, the fully remodeled Corolla Axio HV/Corolla Fielder HV in August 2013, the fully remodeled Harrier HV in December 2013, the fully remodeled Voxy HV/Noah HV in January 2014, the NX300h in July 2014, the RC300h and the Esquire HV in September 2014, the fully remodeled Alphard and Vellfire in January 2015, the Sienta HV in June 2015, the fully remodeled RX-HV in September 2015 and the fully remodeled Prius in November 2015. In the hybrid vehicles area, where strong growth is anticipated, Toyota aims to continue its efforts to offer a diverse line-up of hybrid vehicles, enhance engine power while improving fuel economy and otherwise work towards increasing the sales of hybrid vehicles.

Fuel Cell Vehicles

Toyota began limited sales of a fuel cell vehicle in Japan and the United States in December 2002. In June 2005, Toyota’s new fuel cell passenger vehicle became the first in Japan to acquire vehicle type certification under the Road Vehicles Act, as amended, on March 31, 2005, by Japan’s Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. Leases for fuel cell vehicles began in July 2005. By 2007, Toyota was able to make improvements to start-up and cruising distance at temperatures below freezing, which were technological challenges. Toyota has made advances by solving technological issues such as the above and worked towards the practical use of such solutions, culminating in the general sale of the world’s first mass produced fuel cell vehicle MIRAI in Japan beginning in December 2014, in the United States beginning in June 2015 and in Europe beginning in September 2015.

 

14

Table of Contents
Conventional Engine Vehicles

Subcompact and Compact

Toyota’s subcompact and compact cars include the four-door Corolla sedan, which is one of Toyota’s bestselling models. The Yaris, marketed as the Vitz in Japan, is a subcompact car designed to perform better and offer greater comfort than other compact cars available in the market with low emissions that are particularly attractive to European consumers. In Europe, Toyota introduced the fully remodeled Aygo in June 2014. In Japan, Toyota introduced the remodeled Corolla Axio/Fielder in May 2012, the remodeled Porte and its variant, the Spade, in July 2012 and the remodeled Auris in August 2012. In India, Asia, China and other markets, Toyota introduced the Etios and Vios. In addition, Toyota introduced the AGYA, which is designed and manufactured by Daihatsu. Moreover, Scion iA, which is designed and manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation, was newly introduced in July 2015.

Mini-Vehicles

Mini-vehicles are manufactured and sold by Daihatsu. Daihatsu manufactures mini-vehicles, passenger vehicles, commercial vehicles and auto parts. Mini-vehicles are passenger vehicles, vans or trucks with engine displacements of 660 cubic centimeters or less. Daihatsu sold approximately 530 thousand mini-vehicles and 177 thousand automobiles on a consolidated basis during fiscal 2016. Daihatsu’s largest market is Japan, which accounted for approximately 80% of Daihatsu’s unit sales during fiscal 2016. From 2011, Toyota began to sell some mini-vehicles manufactured by Daihatsu under the Toyota brand.

Mid-Size

Toyota’s mid-size models include the Camry, which has been the bestselling passenger car in the United States for eighteen of the past nineteen calendar years (from 1997 to present) and also for the last fourteen consecutive years. The Camry was fully remodeled in August 2011. Camry sales in the United States for 2015 were approximately 429 thousand units (including Camry hybrids). In addition, Toyota’s other mid-size models include the REIZ for the Chinese market, the Avensis, which was remodeled in November 2008 for the European market, and the Mark X, which was remodeled in October 2009 for the Japanese market.

Luxury & Large

In North America, Europe, Japan and other regions, Toyota’s luxury lineup consists primarily of vehicles sold under the Lexus brand name. Lexus passenger car models include the LS, the GS, the ES, the IS, the HS, the CT and the RC. Lexus models also include the LX, the GX, the RX and the NX sold as luxury sport-utility vehicles. Toyota commenced sales of its luxury automobiles in Japan under the Lexus brand in August 2005. As of March 31, 2016, the Lexus brand lineup in Japan includes the LS, the GS, the HS, the IS, the CT, the LX, the RX, the NX and the RC. The Toyota brand’s full-size luxury car, the Avalon, was remodeled in October 2012, and the Crown was remodeled in December 2012. Toyota also sells the Century limousine in Japan.

Sports and Specialty

In the United States Toyota sells the Scion tC, a sports model targeted at young drivers. In December 2010, Toyota introduced the LFA model under the Lexus brand as the high-performance sports model, and in April 2012, Toyota introduced the 86 (called Scion FR-S in the U.S.), a compact sports car with a front-mounted engine and rear-wheel drive. In October 2014, Toyota introduced the RC coupe that leads the image of Lexus, which engages drivers on a sentimental level.

Recreational and Sport-Utility Vehicles and Pickup Trucks

Toyota sells a variety of sport-utility vehicles and pickup trucks. Toyota’s sport-utility vehicles available in North America include the Sequoia, the 4Runner, the RAV4, the Highlander, the FJ Cruiser and the Land

 

15

Table of Contents
Cruiser, and pickup trucks available are the Tacoma and Tundra. The Tacoma, the Tundra, the Highlander and the Sequoia are manufactured in the United States. Toyota also offers four types of sport-utility vehicles under the Lexus brand, including the LX, the GX, the RX, and the NX. Toyota also manufactures the RX and RAV4 models in Canada. Toyota’s pickup truck, the Hilux, has been the bestselling model of all Toyota cars sold in Thailand. In North America, the fully remodeled RAV4 was introduced in December 2012 and the fully remodeled Highlander was introduced in December 2013. In July 2014, Toyota introduced the new NX model under the Lexus brand. In May 2015, Toyota introduced the fully remodeled Hilux in Thailand and in September 2015, it introduced the fully remodeled RX of the Lexus brand in North America.

Minivans and Cabwagons

Toyota offers several basic models for the global minivan market. Its largest minivans in Japan, the Alphard and the Vellfire, were remodeled in January 2015. In addition, the Corolla Verso was remodeled in December 2008 in Europe, and the Wish was remodeled in April 2009, the Noah/Voxy was remodeled in January 2014 and the new model Esquire was introduced in October 2014 in Japan. Toyota’s other minivan models include, in Japan, the Estima, the Sienta and the Isis, and, in North America, the Sienna.

Trucks and Buses

Toyota’s product lineup includes trucks (including vans) up to a gross vehicle weight of five tons and micro-buses that are sold in Japan and in overseas markets. Trucks and buses are also manufactured and sold by Hino, a subsidiary of Toyota. Hino’s product lineup includes large trucks with a gross vehicle weight of over eleven tons, medium trucks with a gross vehicle weight of between five and eleven tons and small trucks with a gross vehicle weight of up to five tons. Hino’s bus lineup includes medium to large buses used primarily as tour buses and public buses, small buses and micro-buses.Toyota’s research and development is dedicated to capturing the increasingly diverse and sophisticated market through the development of attractive, affordable, high-quality products for customers worldwide. The intellectual property that R&D generates is a vital management resource that Toyota utilizes and protects to maximize its corporate value. For a more detailed discussion of the company’s research and development objectives and policies, see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Research and Development.”

Toyota’s research and development expenditures were approximately ¥1,055.6 billion in fiscal 2016, ¥1,004.5 billion in fiscal 2015 and ¥910.5 billion in fiscal 2014.

Toyota operates a global research and development organization with the primary goal of building automobiles that meet the needs of customers in every region of the world. In Japan, research and development operations are led by Toyota and Toyota Central Research & Development Laboratories, Inc., which works closely with Daihatsu Motor Co., Ltd., Hino Motors, Ltd., Toyota Auto Body Co., Ltd., Toyota Motor East Japan, Inc., and many other Toyota group companies. Overseas, Toyota has a worldwide network of technical centers as well as design and motorsports research and development centers.

Toyota established Toyota Research Institute, Inc. in January 2016 to accelerate research and development of artificial intelligence technology, which has significant potential to support future industrial technologies.

 

90

Table of Contents
The following table provides information on Toyota’s principal research and development facilities.

 

Facility

  	
Principal Activity

Japan	  	
Toyota Technical Center

  	Product planning, style, design and evaluation
Higashi-Fuji Technical Center

  	Advanced research and development
Tokyo Design Research & Laboratory

  	Research of advanced styling designs
Shibetsu Proving Ground

  	Vehicle testing and evaluation
Toyota Central R&D Labs., Inc.

  	Basic research
United States

  	
Toyota Motor Engineering and Manufacturing North America, Inc.

  	North American production and product planning, upper body planning, evaluation
Calty Design Research, Inc.

  	Design
Toyota Research Institute of North America (TRI-NA)

  	Advanced research relating to “energy and environment,” “safety” and “mobility infrastructure”
Toyota Research Institute, Inc.

  	Research and development of artificial intelligence technology
Europe

  	
Toyota Motor Europe NV/SA

  	Upper body planning for European production, evaluation and advanced research
Toyota Europe Design Development S.A.R.L.

  	Design
Toyota Motorsport GmbH

  	Development of motor sports vehicles
Asia Pacific

  	
Toyota Motor Asia Pacific Engineering and Manufacturing Co., Ltd.

  	Upper body planning for Australian and Asian production and evaluation
Toyota Technical Center Asia Pacific Australia Pty, Ltd.*

  	Upper body planning for Australian and Asian production and evaluation
China

  	
Toyota Motor Engineering and Manufacturing (China) Co., Ltd.

  	Research of new, low-energy vehicle technology, vehicle evaluation and quality assurance in China
FAW Toyota Research & Development Co., Ltd

  	Design and evaluation of vehicles manufactured in China
GAC Toyota Motor Co., Ltd. R&D Center

  	Design and evaluation of vehicles manufactured in China
 

*	Toyota Technical Center Asia Pacific Australia Pty, Ltd. is scheduled to be dissolved in September 2016.
Toyota reorganized its subsidiary and vehicle development partner Toyota Technical Development Corporation, integrating its vehicle development functions into Toyota in January 2016.

Toyota carefully analyzes patents and the need for patents in each area of research to formulate more effective research and development strategies. Toyota identifies research and development projects in which it should acquire patents, and files relevant applications as necessary to help build a strong global patent portfolio.

In addition, Toyota wishes to contribute to sustainable mobility by promoting the spread of technologies with environmental and safety benefits. This is why Toyota takes an open stance to patent licensing and grants

 

91

Table of Contents
licenses when appropriate terms are met. For example, in March 2004, Toyota and Ford Motor Company entered into licensing agreements for patents related to hybrid systems and emissions purification. In addition, in March 2010, Toyota and Mazda Motor Corporation entered into a licensing agreement regarding the supply of hybrid system technology.

Toyota does not consider any one group of patents or licenses to be so important that their expiration or termination would materially affect Toyota’s business. For a further discussion of Toyota’s intellectual property, see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Intellectual Property.”
Group’s competitiveness and financial performance as a
forward-looking mobility provider by focusing on its core
business. To this end, we are continuously monitoring and
analyzing our portfolio and can respond in a timely manner
by making any necessary purchases or sales.
LEGAL FACTORS INFLUENCING BUSINESS
Like other international companies, the business of Volkswagen companies is affected by numerous laws in Germany
and abroad. In particular, there are legal requirements
relating to development, products, production and distribution, as well as supervisory, data protection, financial, company, commercial, capital market, anti-trust and tax regulations and regulations relating to labor, banking, state aid,
energy, environmental and insurance law. 