With the future program TOGETHER – Strategy 2025
announced in 2016, we aim to make the Volkswagen Group
more focused, efficient, innovative, customer-oriented and
sustainable, and systematically geared towards generating
profitable growth. The program creates the framework and
lays the cornerstones for us to achieve our vision of being
one of the world’s leading providers of sustainable mobility.
The time horizon until 2025 shows that our thoughts
and actions are long-term and future-oriented. The term
TOGETHER describes the mindset that will be even more vital
to the Volkswagen Group’s long-term success going forward.
Our intention with the new Group strategy is for everyone in
the Volkswagen Group to join us in producing exciting vehicles and forward-looking, tailor-made mobility solutions that
will continue to inspire our customers, meeting their diverse
needs with a portfolio of strong brands. Every day, we actively
assume and exercise responsibility in relation to the environment, safety and society, and we wish to be a role model in
these areas. Integrity, reliability, quality and passion thus
form the basis for our work. In this way, we will aim for
technological leadership in the industry, ensure our competitive profitability and remain an excellent, reliable and
secure employer at the same time.
The Code of Collaboration formulated as part of the
future program is the foundation on which the Group
strategy rests. This Code describes how collaboration is to
take place within the Group and between individuals in their
day-to-day work. Its core values are encapsulated in the terms
“genuine”, “straightforward”, “open-minded”, “as equals” and
“united”.
Goals and Strategies
We are striving for lasting success in tomorrow’s world of mobility and intend to be one of the
world’s leading providers of sustainable mobility. This is the reason we have anchored the
future program TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 in the Group.
FUTURE PROGRAM TOGETHER – STRATEGY 2025
Sustainable
growth
Excellent
employer Competitive
protability
Role model for
environment, safety
and integrity
Excited
customers
52 Goals and Strategies Group Management Report
FOUR BUILDING BLOCKS OF THE FUTURE PROGRAM
TOGETHER – STRATEGY 2025
Our Group strategy comprises a raft of far-reaching strategic
decisions and specific initiatives aimed at safeguarding the
long-term future and generating profitable growth. It is
composed of four building blocks which cover strategic
Group initiatives. We regularly review the progress of these
initiatives so as to analyze the significance, suitability and
target achievement of the measures defined. We are thus able
to adjust the Group initiatives specifically according to the
dynamic changes occurring within our Company.
The first of these is the transformation of the core automotive business. Developing, building and selling vehicles
will remain essential for the Volkswagen Group going forward. However, there will be far-reaching and lasting changes
to this business in the future. That is the reason why we are
comprehensively restructuring our core business to face this
new era of mobility.
The second key building block in our Group strategy is
establishing a new mobility solutions business. In this business, we are developing innovative and efficient, attractive
yet profitable mobility services that are tailored to customer
requirements with the goal of being one of the leading
providers in this growth market in the future.
With the third key building block, we are intensifying our
traditionally excellent innovative strength and placing it on
an even broader footing. This is necessary both for the transformation of our core business and for the establishment
of the new mobility solutions business. To this end, we are
pushing ahead with the digital transformation in all parts of
the Company.
Becoming one of the world’s leading providers of sustainable mobility calls for substantial capital expenditure.
This will be financed in particular through efficiency gains
along the entire value chain – from product development and
procurement through to production and distribution as well
as in the central supporting areas. Additional funds for future
investments can also be generated by optimizing the existing
portfolio of brands and equity investments. Through the
fourth key building block of the Group strategy we will
safeguard the financing of the Volkswagen Group and place it
on a solid basis.
GOALS AND KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS OF THE GROUP’S
STRATEGY
The strategic initiatives describe how we intend to achieve
our vision of being one of the world’s leading providers of
sustainable mobility. For this purpose, we have defined four
target dimensions – excited customers, excellent employer,
role model for the environment, safety and integrity, and
competitive profitability – which are designed to help us
grow sustainably.
Although these target dimensions apply throughout the
Group, the strategic KPIs that we will use in the future to
measure how well we have implemented our Group strategy,
depend on the respective business model. After all, the busi-

BUILDING BLOCKS AND STRATEGIC GROUP INITIATIVES
TRANSFORM
CORE BUSINESS
BUILD
MOBILITY SOLUTIONS
BUSINESS
· Establish mobility
 solutions business
· Develop and expand
 attractive and protable
 smart mobility oering
· Improve
 operational excellence
· Optimize
 business portfolio
· Integrate strategy
 and planning process
SECURE
FUNDING
STRENGTHEN
INNOVATION POWER
· Drive digital transformation
· Create organization 4.0
· Sharpen positioning of brands
· Develop successful vehicle and drivetrain portfolio
· Partner with regional players to win in economy segment
· Streamline modular toolkits
· Implement model line organization
· Realign “Components” business
· Develop battery technology as new core competency
· Develop self-driving system for autonomous vehicles and articial intelligence
· Develop best-in-class user experience across brands and customer touchpoints
Group Management Report Goals and Strategies 53
ness model for our passenger car-producing brands is
different from that for trucks and buses and also from that of
our Power Engineering Business Area and our services
business.
In the following, we describe the Group’s strategic goals
attached to these target dimensions.
The strategic KPIs of the competitive profitability target
dimension have been defined and anchored uniformly in the
Group. As the new Group strategy has yet to be specified in
detail, the content of some strategic KPIs in the other target
dimensions is still being determined. The relevance of the
KPIs is reviewed at Group level and their focus continuously
monitored and adjusted as necessary. We report on the
defined nonfinancial strategic KPIs in the “Corporate
Governance Report” and “Sustainable Value Enhancement”
sections.
Target dimension: excited customers
This target dimension focuses on the diverse needs of our
customers and on tailor-made mobility solutions. We aspire
to exceed our customers’ expectations, generating maximum
benefit for them. That calls not only for the best products, the
most efficient solutions and the best service, but also for
flawless quality and an outstanding image. We want to excite
our existing customers, win over new ones and retain their
loyalty in the long term – because only loyal and faithful
customers will recommend us to others.
The strategic KPIs consist of the conquest rate and KPIs
pertaining to loyalty, customer satisfaction and quality.
Target dimension: excellent employer
Skilled and dedicated employees are one of the keys to
sustainable success. We wish to promote their satisfaction
and motivation by means of equal opportunities, an
attractive and modern working environment, and a forwardlooking organization of work. Exemplary leadership and
corporate culture forms the foundation for this, enabling us
to retain our core workforce and attract new talent.
The strategic KPIs of this target dimension cover internal
employer attractiveness determined by means of the opinion
survey, external employer attractiveness, an external
employer ranking as well as a KPI pertaining to cross-brand
exchange and rotation and the diversity index.
Target dimension: role model for environment, safety and integrity
Every day, we at the Volkswagen Group assume and exercise
responsibility in relation to the environment, safety and
society. This is reflected in our thoughts and actions and in all
our decisions in equal measure.
We pay particular attention to the use of resources and
the emissions of our product portfolio as well as those of our
sites and plants, with the goal of continuously improving our
carbon footprint and lowering pollutant emissions. Through
innovations and outstanding quality, we aim for maximum
product safety.
The most important principles in this process include
compliance with laws and regulations, the establishment of
secure processes, and dealing openly with mistakes so that
they can be avoided or rectified in the future. In terms of
integrity, Volkswagen aims to become a role model for a
modern, transparent and successful enterprise.
The strategic KPIs of this target dimension include the
decarbonization index and KPIs pertaining to emissions
figures, compliance, a culture of dealing openly with mistakes, and integrity.
Target dimension: competitive profitability
Investors judge us by whether we are able to meet our
obligations as regards interest payments and debt repayments. As equity holders, they expect appropriate dividends
and a long-term increase in the value of their shares.
We make investments with a view to achieving profitable
growth and strengthening our competitiveness, thus keeping
the Volkswagen Group on a firm footing and ensuring it
remains an attractive investment option.
The goals we have set ourselves are operational excellence
in all business processes and becoming the benchmark for
the entire industry.
The strategic KPIs are operationalized for internal management purposes: target and actual data are derived from
Volkswagen Group figures.
STRATEGIC KPIS: COMPETITIVE PROFITABILITY
2015 2025
Operating return on sales1 6.0% 7 to 8%
Research and development ratio
(R&D ratio) in the Automotive
Division 7.4% ~6%
Capex/sales revenue in the
Automotive Division 6.9% ~6%
Net cash flow in the
Automotive Division €8,887 million >€10 billion
Payout ratio negative 30%
Net liquidity in the Automotive
Division
€24,522 million,
11.5%
~10% of
consolidated
sales revenue
Return on investment (ROI) in the
Automotive Division –0.2% >15%
1 2015 before special items. 
54 Internal Management System and Key Performance Indicators Group Management Report
The Volkswagen Group’s performance and success can be
measured by both financial and nonfinancial key performance indicators. With the Operational Excellence Group
initiative, we aim to improve these indicators throughout all
areas and along the entire value chain.
In the following, we first describe the internal management process and then explain the Volkswagen Group’s core
performance indicators.
INTERNAL MANAGEMENT PROCESS IN THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP
The Integrate Strategy and Planning Process Group initiative
is focused on continuity and even closer dovetailing of the
Group and brand strategies with the operational planning
process. This enhances transparency when it comes to the
financial assessment and the evaluation of directional decisions. The operational medium-term planning that is conducted once a year and generally covers a period of five years
is incorporated into the strategic planning as a key management element of the Group.
Medium-term planning forms the core of our operational
planning and is used to formulate and safeguard the
requirements for realizing strategic projects designed to meet
Group targets in both technical and economic terms – and
particularly in relation to earnings, cash flow and liquidity
effects. In addition, it is used to coordinate all business areas
with respect to the strategic action areas concerned: functions/processes, products and markets.
When planning the Company’s future, the individual planning components are determined on the basis of the timescale involved:
> the long-term unit sales plan, which sets out market and
segment growth and then derives the Volkswagen Group’s
delivery volumes from them,
> the product program as the strategic, long-term factor
determining corporate policy,
> capacity and utilization planning for the individual sites.
The coordinated results of the upstream planning processes
are used as the basis for the medium-term financial planning:
the Group’s financial planning, including the brands and
business fields, comprises the income statement, cash flow
and balance sheet planning, profitability and liquidity, as well
as the upfront investments needed for alternative products
and the implementation of strategic options. The first year of
the medium-term planning period is fixed and a budget
drawn up for the individual months. This is planned in detail
down to the level of the operating cost centers.
The budget is reviewed each month throughout the year
Group Management Report Internal Management System and Key Performance Indicators 55
CORE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS IN THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP
The Volkswagen Group’s internal management system is
based on nine core performance indicators, which are derived
from our strategic goals:
> Deliveries to customers
> Sales revenue
> Operating result
> Operating return on sales
> Research and development ratio (R&D ratio) in the Automotive Division
> Capex/sales revenue in the Automotive Division
> Net cash flow in the Automotive Division
> Net liquidity in the Automotive Division
> Return on investment (ROI) in the Automotive Division
Deliveries to customers are defined as handovers of new
vehicles to the end customer. This figure shows the popularity of our products and is the measure we use to determine
our competitive position in the various markets. Deliveries
are closely related to our targets of exciting our customers,
being a role model in terms of the environment, safety and
integrity, and being an excellent employer. One of the most
important prerequisites for the Company’s long-term success
is a strong brand portfolio that – on the basis of outstanding
quality – offers tailor-made mobility solutions with safe,
resource-efficient vehicles, thus meeting the diverse needs of
customers. Demand for our products guarantees not only
unit sales and production, but also full utilization of our sites
and the jobs of our employees. The goals we are striving for
cannot be achieved without a skilled, dedicated workforce
and a consensus on shared values.
Sales revenue, which does not include the figures for our
equity-accounted Chinese joint ventures, reflects our market
success in financial terms. Following adjustment for our use
of resources, the operating result reflects the Company’s
actual business activity and documents the economic success
of our core business. The operating return on sales is the ratio
of the operating result to sales revenue.
The research and development ratio (R&D ratio) in the
Automotive Division shows total research and development
costs in relation to sales revenue. Research and development
costs comprise a range of expenses, from futurology through
to the development of marketable products. Particular emphasis is placed on the environmentally friendly orientation of
our product portfolio, digitalization and new technologies.
The R&D ratio underscores the efforts made to ensure the

Company’s future viability: the goal of competitive profitability geared to sustainable growth.
The ratio of capex (investments in property, plant and
equipment, investment property and intangible assets,
excluding capitalized development costs) to sales revenue in
the Automotive Division reflects both our innovative power
and our future competitiveness. It shows our capital expenditure – largely for modernizing, expanding and digitalizing
our product range and for environmentally friendly
drivetrains, as well as for adjusting production capacities and
improving production processes – in relation to the Automotive Division’s sales revenue.
Net cash flow in the Automotive Division represents the
excess funds from operating activities available for dividend
payments, for example. It is calculated as cash flows from
operating activities less cash flows from investing activities
attributable to operating activities.
Net liquidity in the Automotive Division is the total of
cash, cash equivalents, securities, loans and time deposits not
financed by third-party borrowings. To safeguard our business activities, we have formulated the strategic target that
net liquidity in the Automotive Division should amount to
approximately 10% of the consolidated sales revenue.
We use the return on investment (ROI) to calculate the
return on invested capital for a particular period in the Automotive Division, including the Chinese joint ventures on a
proportionate basis, by calculating the ratio of the operating
result after tax to average invested capital. If the return on
investment (ROI) exceeds the market cost of capital, the value
of the Company has increased. This is how we measure the
financial success of our brands, locations and vehicle
projects.
You can find information on and explanations of the sales
figures and the Volkswagen Group’s financial key performance indicators on pages 101 to 107 and on pages 114 to
128, respectively.
Detailed descriptions of our activities and additional
nonfinancial key performance indicators in the areas of sustainability, research and development, procurement, production, sales and marketing, quality assurance, employees,
information technology and the environment can be found
in the chapter entitled “Sustainable Value Enhancement”
beginning on page 133 of this annual report. Nonfinancial
key performance indicators related to compliance are
described in the “Corporate Governance Report” on page 65. 
56 Structure and Business Activities Group Management Report
OUTLINE OF THE LEGAL STRUCTURE OF THE GROUP
Volkswagen AG is the parent company of the Volkswagen
Group. It develops vehicles and components for the Group’s
brands, but also produces and sells vehicles, in particular
passenger cars and light commercial vehicles for the Volkswagen Passenger Cars and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles
brands. In its capacity as parent company, Volkswagen AG
holds indirect or direct interests in AUDI AG, SEAT S.A.,
ŠKODA AUTO a.s., Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG, Scania AB,
MAN SE, Volkswagen Financial Services AG, Volkswagen Bank
GmbH and a large number of other companies in Germany
and abroad. More detailed disclosures are contained in
the list of shareholdings in accordance with sections 285 and
313 of the Handelsgesetzbuch (HGB – German Commercial
Code), which can be accessed at www.volkswagenag.com/en/
InvestorRelations.html and is part of the annual financial
statements.
Volkswagen AG is a vertically integrated energy supply
company as defined by section 3 no. 38 of the Energiewirtschaftsgesetz (EnWG – German Energy Industry Act) and
is therefore subject to the provisions of the EnWG. In the electricity sector, Volkswagen AG generates, sells and distributes
electricity together with a Group subsidiary.
Volkswagen AG’s Board of Management is the ultimate
body responsible for managing the Group. The Supervisory
Board appoints, monitors and advises the Board of Management; it is consulted directly on decisions that are of fundamental significance for the Company.
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE GROUP
The Volkswagen Group is one of the leading multibrand
groups in the automotive industry. The Company’s business
activities comprise the Automotive and Financial Services
divisions. All brands within the Automotive Division – with
the exception of the Volkswagen Passenger Cars and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles brands – are independent legal
entities.
The Automotive Division comprises the Passenger Cars,
Commercial Vehicles and Power Engineering business areas.
The Passenger Cars Business Area essentially consolidates the
Volkswagen Group’s passenger car brands. Activities focus on
the development of vehicles and engines, the production and
sale of passenger cars, and the genuine parts business. The
product portfolio ranges from fuel-efficient compact cars to
luxury vehicles and also includes motorcycles, and will
gradually be supplemented by mobility solutions.
The Commercial Vehicles Business Area primarily comprises the development, production and sale of light commercial vehicles, trucks and buses from the Volkswagen
Commercial Vehicles, Scania and MAN brands, the corresponding genuine parts business and related services. The
collaboration between the MAN and Scania commercial
vehicle brands is coordinated within the TRATON GROUP. The
commercial vehicles portfolio ranges from pickups to heavy
trucks and buses.
The Power Engineering Business Area combines the largebore diesel engines, turbomachinery, special gear units,
propulsion components and testing systems businesses.
The activities of the Financial Services Division comprise
dealer and customer financing, vehicle leasing, direct banking
and insurance activities, as well as fleet management and
mobility offerings.
With its brands, the Volkswagen Group is present in all
relevant markets around the world. The Group’s key sales
markets currently include Western Europe, China, the USA,
Brazil, Russia and Mexico.
Volkswagen AG and the Volkswagen Group are managed
by the Volkswagen AG Board of Management in accordance
with the Volkswagen AG Articles of Association and the rules
of procedure for Volkswagen AG’s Board of Management
issued by the Supervisory Board.

Structure and Business Activities
This chapter describes the legal and organizational structure of the Volkswagen Group
and explains the material changes in 2018 with respect to equity investments. 
Group Management Report Structure and Business Activities 57
To further enhance its leadership and management model,
the Volkswagen Group introduced an additional internal
operational structure in spring 2018. Volkswagen is convinced that this will allow better use of existing competences
and economies of scale, make it possible to leverage synergies
more systematically and accelerate decision making.
In addition to the Finance & IT, Human Resources and
Integrity and Legal Affairs divisions, the Volkswagen Group
collaborates across six operating units and the China region,
these being the “Volume”, “Premium”, “Sport & Luxury”,
“Truck & Bus” brand groups, as well as the Components &
Procurement and Financial Services operating units. The
“Volume” brand group comprises the Volkswagen Passenger
Cars, SEAT, ŠKODA and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles
brands. The Audi, Lamborghini and Ducati brands are
brought together in the “Premium” brand group. “Sport &
Luxury” is comprised of the Porsche, Bentley and Bugatti
brands. The “Truck & Bus” brand group is the umbrella for
the Scania and MAN brands. Components & Procurement will
function as one unit spanning all of the brands and supporting them. The Financial Services business has been
combined into a single unit.
 This prepares the Volkswagen Group for a management
structure that is simpler, leaner and more effective, and
strengthens the brands, giving them more autonomy. In line
with the principle of subsidiarity, decisions will be taken at
the lowest competent level, close to business operations.
At the same time, spreading the Group’s management
duties more broadly means that responsibility is assigned
more clearly and definitively. Every member of the Board of
Management has assumed additional higher-level duties for
the Group. At the same time, the members of the Board of
Management of Volkswagen AG have responsibility for a
brand group or operating unit, improving collaboration
between the brands and the Group as a whole and ensuring
that management of the Group is a shared undertaking.
Each brand in the Volkswagen Group is managed by a
brand board of management, which ensures its independent
and self-contained development and business operations. To
the extent permitted by law, the board adheres to the Group
targets and requirements laid down by the Board of
Management of Volkswagen AG, as well as with the agreements in the brand groups. This allows Group-wide interests
to be pursued, while at the same time safeguarding and
reinforcing each brand’s specific characteristics. Matters that
are of importance to the Group as a whole are submitted to
the Group Board of Management in order to reach agreement
between the parties involved, to the extent permitted by law.
The rights and obligations of the statutory bodies of the
relevant brand company remain unaffected.
The companies of the Volkswagen Group are managed by
their respective managements on their own responsibility. In
addition to the interests of their own companies, the
management of each individual company takes into account
the interests of the Group, the relevant brand group and the
individual brands in accordance with the framework laid
down by law.
At Group level, committees also address key strategic
issues, for example relating to product planning, investments, risks management and management issues. The
portfolio of these committees and the regulation landscape
at Group level was revised in the reporting year and, in the
course of this, a committee was established to manage the
technology strategy. This has reduced complexity and reinforced governance within the Group.
Within our future program TOGETHER – Strategy 2025,
the Organization 4.0 Group initiative is also supporting the
Company’s transformation. The aim of this initiative is to
connect activities across divisions, initiate new organizational approaches and anchor these in the Group for the long
term. This will not only enable but actively create holistic
stimulus for innovation, entrepreneurship and change.
MATERIAL CHANGES IN EQUITY INVESTMENTS
The control and profit and loss transfer agreement between
MAN SE, as the controlled company, and TRATON SE (at that
time Volkswagen Truck & Bus AG), a wholly owned subsidiary
of Volkswagen AG, as the controlling company, came into
force upon its entry in the commercial register on July 16,
2013. The conclusion of the control and profit and loss
transfer agreement replaced, the group based on the de facto
exercise of management control with a contractual group,
permitting considerably more efficient and less bureaucratic
cooperation between the MAN Group and the rest of the
Volkswagen Group. In the summer of 2018, the Higher
Regional Court in Munich made a final decision in the award
proceedings regarding the appropriateness of the cash
settlement and the right to compensation for the noncontrolling interest shareholders of MAN SE, ruling that the
cash settlement amount set out in the contract should be
increased to €90.29 per share and the annual compensation
to €5.47 gross per share. Following the entry of the final
decisions in the commercial register in August 2018, the
noncontrolling interest shareholders were entitled to tender
their shares in accordance with section 305 of the Aktiengesetz (AktG – German Stock Corporation Act) within a twomonth period. The decision in the award proceedings
resulted in a significant increase in the annual compensation
to be paid to noncontrolling interest shareholders of MAN SE.
In the opinion of the Board of Management at TRATON SE (at
 
58 Structure and Business Activities Group Management Report
that time TRATON AG), this was no longer proportionate to
the profit transfer from MAN SE and other benefits stipulated
in the control and profit and loss transfer agreement;
TRATON SE therefore exercised its right to extraordinary
termination in accordance with section 304(4) of the German
Stock Corporation Act on August 22, 2018 and terminated the
control and profit and loss transfer agreement effective
January 1, 2019. As of year-end 2018, TRATON SE held
87.04 (75.73)% of the ordinary shares and 83.05 (46.95)% of
the preferred shares in MAN SE. Following the announcement
of the termination of the control and profit and loss transfer
agreement and the recording thereof in the commercial
register on January 3, 2019, the noncontrolling shareholders
of MAN SE once again had the right to tender their shares to
TRATON SE, pursuant to the provisions of the control and
profit and loss transfer agreement, within a two-month
period at a cash settlement price of €90.29.
With the Optimize business portfolio Group initiative, the
Board of Management intends to ensure the Volkswagen
Group’s competitiveness and financial performance as a
forward-looking mobility provider by focusing on its core
business. To this end, we are continuously monitoring and
analyzing our portfolio and can respond in a timely manner
by making any necessary purchases or sales.
LEGAL FACTORS INFLUENCING BUSINESS
Like other international companies, the business of Volkswagen companies is affected by numerous laws in Germany
and abroad. In particular, there are legal requirements
relating to development, products, production and distribution, as well as supervisory, data protection, financial, company, commercial, capital market, anti-trust and tax regulations and regulations relating to labor, banking, state aid,
energy, environmental and insurance law. 
OVERVIEW Segments. We have four operating segments that represent the primary businesses reported in our consolidated financial statements: Automotive, Financial Services, Ford Smart Mobility LLC, and Central Treasury Operations. Automotive Segment. Our Automotive segment primarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories worldwide, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories. The segment includes five regional business units: North America, South America, Europe, Middle East & Africa, and Asia Pacific. Financial Services Segment. The Financial Services segment primarily includes our vehicle-related financing and leasing activities at Ford Credit. All Other. Ford Smart Mobility LLC and Central Treasury Operations are combined in All Other. See Note 24 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for more information regarding All Other. In the first quarter of 2018, we will change our reportable segments to better reflect the manner in which we now manage our business, including resource allocation and assessment. We will report our results in three operating segments that represent the primary businesses reported in our consolidated financial statements. These operating segments will be Automotive, Mobility, and Ford Credit. Net income will comprise the financial results of these operating segments, Corporate Other (which includes corporate governance costs, interest income on our cash, and portfolio gains and losses), Interest on Debt, Special Items, and Taxes. AUTOMOTIVE SEGMENT General Our vehicle brands are Ford and Lincoln. In 2017, we sold approximately 6,607,000 vehicles at wholesale throughout the world. See “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” (“Item 7”) for a discussion of our calculation of wholesale unit volumes. Substantially all of our vehicles, parts, and accessories are sold through distributors and dealers (collectively, “dealerships”), the substantial majority of which are independently owned. At December 31, 2017, the approximate number of dealerships worldwide distributing our vehicle brands was as follows: Brand Number of Dealerships at December 31, 2017 Ford 10,345 Ford-Lincoln (combined) 820 Lincoln 263 Total 11,428 We do not depend on any single customer or a few customers to the extent that the loss of such customers would have a material adverse effect on our business. In addition to the products we sell to our dealerships for retail sale, we also sell vehicles to our dealerships for sale to fleet customers, including commercial fleet customers, daily rental car companies, and governments. We also sell parts and accessories, primarily to our dealerships (which in turn sell these products to retail customers) and to authorized parts distributors (which in turn primarily sell these products to retailers). We also offer extended service contracts. The worldwide automotive industry is affected significantly by general economic conditions over which we have little control. Vehicles are durable goods, and consumers have latitude in determining whether and when to replace an existing vehicle. The decision whether to purchase a vehicle may be affected significantly by slowing economic growth, geopolitical events, and other factors (including the cost of purchasing and operating cars, trucks, and SUVs and the availability and cost of financing and fuel). As we have seen in the United States and Europe, in particular, the number of cars, trucks, and SUVs sold may vary substantially from year to year. Further, the automotive industry is a highly competitive business that has a wide and growing variety of product offerings from a growing number of manufacturers. Item 1. Business (Continued) 3 Our wholesale unit volumes vary with the level of total industry demand and our share of that industry demand. Our wholesale unit volumes also are influenced by the level of dealer inventory. Our share is influenced by how our products are perceived in comparison to those offered by other manufacturers based on many factors, including price, quality, styling, reliability, safety, fuel efficiency, functionality, and reputation. Our share also is affected by the timing and frequency of new model introductions. Our ability to satisfy changing consumer preferences with respect to type or size of vehicle, as well as design and performance characteristics, affects our sales and earnings significantly. As with other manufacturers, the profitability of our business is affected by many factors, including: • Wholesale unit volumes • Margin of profit on each vehicle sold - which in turn is affected by many factors, such as: Market factors - volume and mix of vehicles and options sold, and net pricing (reflecting, among other factors, incentive programs) Costs of components and raw materials necessary for production of vehicles Costs for customer warranty claims and additional service actions Costs for safety, emissions, and fuel economy technology and equipment • A high proportion of relatively fixed structural costs, so that small changes in wholesale unit volumes can significantly affect overall profitability Our industry has a very competitive pricing environment, driven in part by industry excess capacity, which is concentrated in Europe and Asia but affects other markets because much of this capacity can be redirected to other markets. Prior to its recent strengthening, the decline in the value of the yen over the last several years also has contributed significantly to competitive pressures in many of our markets. For the past several decades, manufacturers typically have given price discounts and other marketing incentives to maintain market share and production levels. Competitive Position. The worldwide automotive industry consists of many producers, with no single dominant producer. Certain manufacturers, however, account for the major percentage of total sales within particular countries, especially their countries of origin. Key competitors with global presence include Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, General Motors Company, Groupe PSA, Honda Motor Company, Hyundai-Kia Automotive Group, Renault-Nissan B.V., Suzuki Motor Corporation, Toyota Motor Corporation, and Volkswagen AG Group. Seasonality. We manage our vehicle production schedule based on a number of factors, including retail sales (i.e., units sold by our dealerships to their customers at retail) and dealer stock levels (i.e., the number of units held in inventory by our dealerships for sale to their customers). Historically, we have experienced some seasonal fluctuation in the business, with production in many markets tending to be higher in the first half of the year to meet demand in the spring and summer (typically the strongest sales months of the year). Backlog Orders. We generally produce and ship our products on average within approximately 20 days after an order is deemed to become firm. Therefore, no significant amount of backlog orders accumulates during any period. Raw Materials. We purchase a wide variety of raw materials from numerous suppliers around the world for use in production of our vehicles. These materials include base metals (e.g., steel, iron castings, and aluminum), precious metals (e.g., palladium), energy (e.g., natural gas), and plastics/resins (e.g., polypropylene). We believe we have adequate supplies or sources of availability of raw materials necessary to meet our needs. There always are risks and uncertainties with respect to the supply of raw materials, however, which could impact availability in sufficient quantities to meet our needs. See the “Overview” section of Item 7 for a discussion of commodity and energy price trends, and “Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk” (“Item 7A”) for a discussion of commodity price risks. Intellectual Property. We own or hold licenses to use numerous patents, copyrights, and trademarks on a global basis. Our policy is to protect our competitive position by, among other methods, filing U.S. and international patent applications to protect technology and improvements that we consider important to the development of our business. We have generated a large number of patents, and expect this portfolio to continue to grow as we actively pursue additional technological innovation. We have approximately 57,000 active patents and pending patent applications globally, with an average age for patents in our active patent portfolio of just under five years. In addition to this intellectual property, we also rely on our proprietary knowledge and ongoing technological innovation to develop and maintain our competitive position. Although we believe these patents, patent applications, and know-how, in the aggregate, are important to the conduct of our business, and we obtain licenses to use certain intellectual property owned by others, none is individually considered material to our business. We also own numerous trademarks and service marks that contribute to the identity Item 1. Business (Continued) 4 and recognition of our Company and its products and services globally. Certain of these marks are integral to the conduct of our business, a loss of any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business. Warranty Coverage, Field Service Actions, and Customer Satisfaction Actions. We provide warranties on vehicles we sell. Warranties are offered for specific periods of time and/or mileage, and vary depending upon the type of product and the geographic location of its sale. Pursuant to these warranties, we will repair, replace, or adjust all parts on a vehicle that are defective in factory-supplied materials or workmanship during the specified warranty period. In addition to the costs associated with this warranty coverage provided on our vehicles, we also incur costs as a result of field service actions (i.e., safety recalls, emission recalls, and other product campaigns), and for customer satisfaction actions. For additional information regarding warranty and related costs, see “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 and Note 23 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. Wholesales Wholesales consist primarily of vehicles sold to dealerships. For the majority of such sales, we recognize revenue when we ship the vehicles to our customers (i.e., the dealerships) from our manufacturing facilities. See the “Overview” section in Item 7 for additional discussion of revenue recognition practices. Wholesales in each region and in certain key markets within each region during the past three years were as follows: Wholesales (a) (in thousands of units) 2015 2016 2017 United States 2,677 2,588 2,566 Canada 285 313 308 Mexico 93 103 82 North America 3,073 3,019 2,967 Brazil 250 182 215 Argentina 94 101 115 South America 381 325 373 United Kingdom 447 428 418 Germany 261 283 277 Russia 38 45 54 Turkey 128 116 116 Europe 1,530 1,539 1,582 Middle East & Africa 187 161 119 China 1,160 1,267 1,215 Australia 71 82 78 India 78 86 88 ASEAN (b) 80 106 122 Asia Pacific (c) 1,464 1,607 1,566 Total Company 6,635 6,651 6,607 _______ (a) Wholesale unit volume includes sales of medium and heavy trucks. Wholesale unit volume includes all Ford and Lincoln badged units (whether produced by Ford or by an unconsolidated affiliate) that are sold to dealerships, units manufactured by Ford that are sold to other manufacturers, units distributed for other manufacturers, and local brand units produced by our unconsolidated Chinese joint venture Jiangling Motors Corporation, Ltd. (“JMC”) that are sold to dealerships. Vehicles sold to daily rental car companies that are subject to a guaranteed repurchase option (i.e., rental repurchase), as well as other sales of finished vehicles for which the recognition of revenue is deferred (e.g., consignments), also are included in wholesale unit volume. Revenue from certain vehicles in wholesale unit volume (specifically, Ford badged vehicles produced and distributed by our unconsolidated affiliates, as well as JMC brand vehicles) are not included in our revenue. (b) ASEAN includes Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam. (c) Asia Pacific market share includes Ford brand and JMC brand vehicles produced and sold by our unconsolidated affiliates. Item 1. Business (Continued) 5 Retail Sales, Industry Volume, and Market Share Retail sales, industry volume, and market share in each region and in certain key markets within each region during the past three years were as follows: Retail Sales (a) Industry Volume (b) Market Share (c) (in millions of units) (in millions of units) (as a percentage) 2015 2016 2017 2015 2016 2017 2015 2016 2017 United States 2.6 2.6 2.6 17.8 17.9 17.5 14.7% 14.6% 14.8% Canada 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.9 2.0 2.1 14.4 15.4 14.9 Mexico 0.1 0.1 0.1 1.4 1.6 1.6 6.4 6.2 5.3 North America 3.0 3.0 3.0 21.5 21.8 21.5 14.0 13.9 13.9 Brazil 0.3 0.2 0.2 2.6 2.1 2.2 10.4% 9.2% 9.6% Argentina 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.6 0.7 0.9 14.9 13.6 12.8 South America 0.4 0.3 0.4 4.2 3.7 4.2 9.6 8.8 8.9 United Kingdom 0.4 0.4 0.4 3.1 3.1 3.0 14.3% 14.0% 13.8% Germany 0.3 0.3 0.3 3.5 3.7 3.8 7.3 7.6 7.7 Russia 0.0 0.0 0.1 1.6 1.5 1.6 2.4 2.9 3.1 Turkey 0.1 0.1 0.1 1.0 1.0 1.0 12.6 11.4 11.9 Europe 1.5 1.5 1.6 19.2 20.1 20.9 7.7 7.7 7.5 Middle East & Africa 0.2 0.2 0.1 4.3 3.7 3.6 4.4% 4.5% 3.9% China 1.1 1.3 1.2 23.8 27.5 28.2 4.7% 4.6% 4.2% Australia 0.1 0.1 0.1 1.2 1.2 1.2 6.1 6.9 6.6 India 0.1 0.1 0.1 3.5 3.7 4.0 2.1 2.4 2.2 ASEAN (d) 0.1 0.1 0.1 1.4 1.5 1.6 6.0 7.0 7.6 Asia Pacific (e) 1.4 1.6 1.5 39.5 43.4 44.8 3.6 3.7 3.4 Global N/A N/A N/A 88.7 92.7 94.9 7.3% 7.2% 7.0% Total Company 6.5 6.7 6.6 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A ______________ (a) Retail sales represents primarily sales by dealers and is based, in part, on estimated vehicle registrations; includes medium and heavy trucks. (b) Industry volume is an internal estimate based on publicly-available data collected from various government, private, and public sources around the globe; includes medium and heavy trucks. (c) Market share represents reported retail sales of our brands as a percent of total industry volume in the relevant market or region. (d) ASEAN includes Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam. (e) Asia Pacific market share includes Ford brand and JMC brand vehicles produced and sold by our unconsolidated affiliates. U.S. Sales by Type The following table shows 2017 U.S. retail sales volume and U.S. wholesales segregated by truck, SUV, and car sales. U.S. retail sales volume reflects transactions with (i) retail and fleet customers (as reported by dealers), (ii) government, and (iii) Ford management. U.S. wholesales reflect sales to dealers. U.S. Retail Sales U.S. Wholesales Trucks 1,123,416 1,114,304 SUVs 867,909 869,725 Cars 595,390 581,754 Total Vehicles 2,586,715 2,565,783 Item 1. Business (Continued) 6 FINANCIAL SERVICES SEGMENT Ford Motor Credit Company LLC Our wholly-owned subsidiary Ford Credit offers a wide variety of automotive financing products to and through automotive dealers throughout the world. The predominant share of Ford Credit’s business consists of financing our vehicles and supporting our dealers. Ford Credit earns its revenue primarily from payments made under retail installment sale and lease contracts that it originates and purchases; interest rate supplements and other support payments from us and our subsidiaries; and payments made under dealer financing programs. As a result of these financing activities, Ford Credit has a large portfolio of finance receivables and operating leases which it classifies into two portfolios—“consumer” and “non-consumer.” Finance receivables and operating leases in the consumer portfolio include products offered to individuals and businesses that finance the acquisition of our vehicles from dealers for personal and commercial use. Retail financing includes retail installment sale contracts for new and used vehicles and direct financing leases for new vehicles to retail and commercial customers, including leasing companies, government entities, daily rental companies, and fleet customers. Finance receivables in the non-consumer portfolio include products offered to automotive dealers. Ford Credit makes wholesale loans to dealers to finance the purchase of vehicle inventory, also known as floorplan financing, as well as loans to dealers to finance working capital and improvements to dealership facilities, finance the purchase of dealership real estate, and finance other dealer vehicle programs. Ford Credit also purchases receivables generated by us and our subsidiaries, primarily related to the sale of parts and accessories to dealers and certain used vehicles from daily rental fleet companies. Ford Credit also provides financing to us for vehicles that we lease to our employees. Ford Credit does business in the United States and Canada through business centers. Outside of the United States, Europe is Ford Credit’s largest operation. Ford Credit’s European operations are managed primarily through its United Kingdom-based subsidiary, FCE Bank plc (“FCE”). Within Europe, FCE’s largest markets are the United Kingdom and Germany, representing 59% of FCE’s finance receivables and operating leases at year-end 2017. The following table shows Ford Credit’s financing shares of new Ford and Lincoln vehicle retail sales in the United States and new Ford vehicles sold in Europe, as well as its wholesale financing shares of new Ford and Lincoln vehicles acquired by dealers in the United States and new Ford vehicles acquired by dealers in Europe: Years Ended December 31, 2015 2016 2017 United States - Financing Share Retail installment and lease share of Ford retail sales (excl. Fleet) 65% 56% 55% Wholesale 76 76 76 Europe - Financing Share (incl. Fleet) Retail installment and lease share of total Ford sales 37% 37% 37% Wholesale 98 98 98 See Item 7 and Notes 10, 11, and 13 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for a detailed discussion of Ford Credit’s receivables, credit losses, allowance for credit losses, loss-to-receivables ratios, funding sources, and funding strategies. See Item 7A for discussion of how Ford Credit manages its financial market risks. We routinely sponsor special retail and lease incentives to dealers’ customers who choose to finance or lease our vehicles from Ford Credit. In order to compensate Ford Credit for the lower interest or lease payments offered to the retail customer, we pay the discounted value of the incentive directly to Ford Credit when it originates the retail finance or lease contract with the dealer’s customer. These programs increase Ford Credit’s financing volume and share. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for information about our accounting for these programs. We have an Amended and Restated Relationship Agreement with Ford Credit, pursuant to which, if Ford Credit’s managed leverage for a calendar quarter were to be higher than 11.5:1 (as reported in its most recent periodic report), Ford Credit could require us to make or cause to be made a capital contribution to it in an amount sufficient to have caused such managed leverage to have been 11.5:1. No capital contributions have been made pursuant to this agreement. The agreement also allocates to Ford Credit $3 billion of commitments under our corporate credit facility. In a separate agreement with FCE, Ford Credit has agreed to maintain FCE’s net worth in excess of $500 million. No payments have been made pursuant to that agreement. Item 1. Business (Continued) 7 GOVERNMENTAL STANDARDS Many governmental standards and regulations relating to safety, fuel economy, emissions control, noise control, vehicle recycling, substances of concern, vehicle damage, and theft prevention are applicable to new motor vehicles, engines, and equipment manufactured for sale. In addition, manufacturing and other automotive assembly facilities are subject to stringent standards regulating air emissions, water discharges, and the handling and disposal of hazardous substances. The most significant of the standards and regulations affecting us are discussed below: Vehicle Emissions Control U.S. Requirements – Federal and California Emission Standards. The federal Clean Air Act imposes stringent limits on the amount of regulated pollutants that lawfully may be emitted by new vehicles and engines produced for sale in the United States. Pursuant to the Clean Air Act, California may establish its own vehicle emission standards, which can then be adopted by other states. Both the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) and the California Air Resources Board (“CARB”) have established tailpipe and evaporative emissions standards for light and medium duty vehicles that become increasingly stringent through the 2025 model year. Thirteen states, primarily located in the Northeast and Northwest, have adopted the California standards. Compliance with both the federal and California standards could be challenging. Both federal and California regulations require motor vehicles to be equipped with on-board diagnostic (“OBD”) systems that monitor emission-related systems and components. As OBD requirements become more complex and challenging over time, they could lead to increased vehicle recalls and warranty costs. Compliance with automobile emission standards depends in part on the widespread availability of high-quality and consistent automotive fuels that the vehicles were designed to use. Fuel variables that can affect vehicle emissions include ethanol content, octane ratings, and the use of metallic-based fuel additives, among other things. Legislative, regulatory, and judicial developments related to fuel quality at both the national and state levels could affect vehicle manufacturers’ warranty costs as well as their ability to comply with vehicle emission standards. The California vehicle emissions program also includes requirements for manufacturers to produce and deliver for sale zero-emission vehicles (“ZEVs”). The current ZEV regulations mandate substantial annual increases in the production and sale of battery-electric, fuel cell, and plug-in hybrid vehicles through the 2025 model year. By the 2025 model year, approximately 15% of a manufacturer’s total California sales volume will need to be made up of such vehicles. Compliance with ZEV rules could have a substantial adverse effect on our sales volumes and profits. We are concerned that the market and infrastructure in California may not support the large volume of advanced-technology vehicles that manufacturers will be required to produce, especially if gasoline prices remain relatively low. We also are concerned about enforcement of the ZEV mandate in other states that have adopted California’s ZEV program, where the existence of a market for such vehicles is even less certain. European Requirements. European Union (“EU”) directives and related legislation limit the amount of regulated pollutants that may be emitted by new motor vehicles and engines sold in the EU. Stringent new Stage 6 emission standards took effect for vehicle registrations starting in September 2014, and a second phase introduced a new laboratory test cycle for CO2 and emissions in September 2017. These standards drive the need for additional diesel exhaust after-treatment, which adds cost to, and potentially impacts, the diesel CO2 advantage. The mandatory Real Driving Emission (“RDE”) rules require manufacturers to conduct on-road emission tests using portable emission analyzers. These on-road emission tests complement the laboratory-based tests. In September 2017, manufacturers began to reduce the divergence between the regulatory limit that is tested in laboratory conditions and the values of RDE tests (“conformity factors”). The costs associated with conducting the RDE tests and complying with the conformity factors are significant. A second step for RDEs to further reduce the conformity factors becomes mandatory for new vehicle type approvals by authorities starting in January 2020. Europe is in the process of finalizing the RDE in-use surveillance rules with proposals to allow third parties to conduct testing and to define a process to challenge the product compliance with authorities. The WVTA (Whole Vehicle Type Approval) Regulations are being adapted to cover increased market surveillance, and the EU Commission announced that in 2018 it will begin to discuss air quality modeling scenarios for the next steps of emission standards post Stage 6. There is an increasing trend of city access restrictions for internal combustion engine powered vehicles, in particular in European cities that do not meet air quality limits. Depending on city and country, the conditions for access will vary (e.g., different emission limits or vehicle requirements), which indirectly impact residual values and sales of internal combustion powered vehicles prior to restrictions being agreed. There might also be a need to retrofit emission aftertreatment of vehicles. There are also discussions in several European countries to ban the registration of internal combustion powered vehicles in the future. Item 1. Business (Continued) 8 Other National Requirements. Many countries, in an effort to address air quality concerns, are adopting previous versions of European or United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (“UN-ECE”) mobile source emission regulations. Some countries have adopted more advanced regulations based on the most recent version of European or U.S. regulations; for example, in December 2016, the China Ministry of Environmental Protection (“MEP”) finalized emission regulations based on European Stage VI emission standards for light duty vehicles and U.S. evaporative emissions and OBD requirements. The China Stage VI standards incorporate two levels of stringency. Stage one is slated for implementation by July 1, 2020, and the more stringent stage two level is slated for implementation by July 1, 2023. In 2018, the MEP will continue to focus on the development of detailed test procedures for RDE and OBD. Korea and Taiwan have adopted very stringent U.S.-based standards for gasoline vehicles and European-based standards for diesel vehicles. Although these countries have adopted regulations based on UN-ECE or U.S. standards, there may be some unique testing provisions that require emission-control systems to be redesigned for these markets. Canadian criteria emissions regulations are largely aligned with U.S. requirements. In October 2016, the Canadian Province of Quebec passed legislation enabling regulation of a ZEV mandate. Final regulations were published in December 2017, and came into effect in January 2018. Quebec’s final regulations are more stringent than those in place in California and the other U.S. ZEV mandate states. Not all countries have adopted appropriate fuel quality standards to accompany the stringent emission standards adopted. This could lead to compliance problems, particularly if OBD or in-use surveillance requirements are implemented. Brazil and Chile have introduced stringent emission and OBD standards based on the European Stage 5 standards for light duty vehicles and Stage V standards for heavy duty vehicles. In Brazil, all light duty vehicles are required to meet U.S.-based PROCONVE L6 standards and more stringent OBD standards for diesel light duty vehicles were introduced in 2017. Argentina implemented European Stage 5 standards for all new light duty vehicles in 2017 and European Stage V standards for heavy duty vehicles in 2018. Global Developments. Beginning in September 2015, EPA and CARB have pursued enforcement actions against a major competitor in connection with its use of “defeat devices” in hundreds of thousands of light-duty diesel vehicles. These actions have resulted in settlements involving billions of dollars for environmental remediation and civil penalties, as well as indictments of and guilty pleas from several employees on charges of committing federal crimes. The competitor continues to face various class action suits, as well as numerous claims and investigations by various U.S. states and other nations. Defeat devices are elements of design (typically embedded in software) that improperly cause the emission control system to function less effectively during normal on-road driving than during an official laboratory emissions test, without justification. They are prohibited by law in many jurisdictions, and we do not use defeat devices i Item 1. Business (Continued) 9 EPA also regulates vehicle greenhouse gas (“GHG”) emissions under the Clean Air Act. Because the vast majority of GHGs emitted by a vehicle are the result of fuel combustion, GHG emission standards effectively are fuel economy standards. Thus, it is necessary for NHTSA and EPA to coordinate with each other on their fuel economy and GHG standards, respectively, to avoid potential inconsistencies. In 2010, EPA and NHTSA jointly promulgated regulations establishing the “One National Program” of CAFE and GHG regulations for light duty vehicles for the 2012-2016 model years. In 2012, EPA and NHTSA jointly promulgated regulations extending the One National Program framework through the 2025 model year. These rules require manufacturers to achieve increasingly stringent standards reaching approximately 50 mpg by the 2025 model year. Each manufacturer’s specific task depends on the mix of vehicles it sells. The rules include the opportunity for manufacturers to earn credits for technologies that achieve real-world CO2 reductions and fuel economy improvements that are not captured by the EPA fuel economy test procedures. Manufacturers also can earn credits for GHG reductions not specifically tied to fuel economy, such as improvements in air conditioning systems. The existing One National Program standards will be difficult to meet if fuel prices remain relatively low and market conditions do not drive consumers to purchase electric vehicles and other highly fuel-efficient vehicles in large numbers. We are concerned about the commercial feasibility of meeting future model year GHG and CAFE standards, particularly the 2022-2025 standards, because of the many unknowns regarding technology development, market conditions, and other factors so far into the future. The One National Program rules provided for a midterm evaluation process under which, by April 2018, EPA and NHTSA would re-evaluate their standards for model years 2022-2025 in order to ensure that those standards are feasible and optimal in light of intervening events. In January 2017, EPA announced an accelerated decision to maintain the GHG standards originally set for those model years–that decision is currently under reconsideration by EPA. NHTSA is continuing to conduct its evaluation with respect to the model year 2022-2025 standards. It is expected that by April 2018 EPA and NHTSA will either announce a decision to maintain the existing GHG and fuel economy standards, or commence a rulemaking to set revised standards. If the agencies seek to impose and enforce fuel economy and GHG standards that are misaligned with market conditions, we likely would be forced to take various actions that could have substantial adverse effects on our sales volume and profits. Such actions likely would include restricting offerings of selected engines and popular options; increasing market support programs for our most fuel-efficient cars and light trucks; and ultimately curtailing the production and sale of certain vehicles such as high-performance cars, utilities, and/or full-size light trucks, in order to maintain compliance. California has asserted the right to regulate motor vehicle GHG emissions, and other states have asserted the right to adopt the California standards. With the adoption of the federal One National Program standards discussed above, California and the other states have agreed that compliance with the federal program would satisfy compliance with any purported state GHG requirements for the 2012–2025 model years. This avoids a patchwork of potentially conflicting federal and state GHG standards. Should California and other states ever renew their efforts to enforce state-specific motor vehicle GHG rules, this would impose significant costs on automotive manufacturers. U.S. Requirements – Heavy Duty Vehicles. EPA and NHTSA have jointly promulgated GHG and fuel economy standards for heavy duty vehicles (generally, vehicles over 8,500 pounds gross vehicle weight rating) through the 2027 model year. In our case, the standards primarily affect our heavy duty pickup trucks and vans, plus vocational vehicles such as shuttle buses and delivery trucks. As the heavy duty standards increase in stringency, it may become more difficult to comply while continuing to offer a full lineup of heavy duty trucks. European Requirements. In December 2008, the EU approved regulation of passenger car CO2 emissions, with a 2012-2015 phase-in period, that limits the industry fleet average to a maximum of 130 grams per kilometer (“g/km”), using a sliding scale (the EU target slope) based on vehicle weight. This regulation provides different CO2 targets for each manufacturer based on the respective average vehicle weight for its fleet of vehicles initially registered in a calendar year. Limited credits are available for CO2 off-cycle technologies (“eco-innovations”), certain alternative fuels, and vehicles with CO2 emissions below 50 g/km for a period of time. A penalty system applies to manufacturers failing to meet the individual CO2 targets. Pooling agreements between manufacturers are possible under certain conditions. Starting in 2020, an EU industry target of 95 g/km has been set, for which 95% of a manufacturer’s fleet has to comply; by 2021, 100% of a manufacturer’s fleet has to comply. Outside of the EU, Switzerland, for example, has introduced similar rules, which began phasing-in in July 2012, although the stringency of the industry average emission target is significantly higher in a volatile market. We face the risk of advance premium payment requirements if, for example, unexpected market fluctuation within a quarter negatively impacts our average fleet performance. Item 1. Business (Continued) 10 In separate legislation, “complementary measures” have been mandated, including requirements related to fuel economy indicators, gear shift indicators, tire pressure monitoring systems, low rolling resistance tires, and more-efficient low-CO2 mobile air conditioning systems. The EU Commission introduced in 2011 a CO2 target for commercial light duty vehicles to be at an EU industry average of 175 g/km starting in 2014 and 147 g/km starting in 2020 (with a similar 2020 ruling in Switzerland). For “multi-stage vehicles” (e.g., our Transit chassis cabs), the base manufacturer (e.g., Ford) is fully responsible for the CO2 performance of the final up-fitted vehicles. The EU legislation for light commercial vehicles also includes a penalty system, super-credits for vehicles below 50 g/km (granted between 2014 and 2017), and limited credits for CO2 off-cycle eco-innovations, pooling, etc., similar to the passenger car CO2 regulation. The EU Commission has proposed revised rules for the years 2021 to 2024 and 2025/2030 that include a further tightening of CO2 limits for passenger cars and light commercial vans, including expected shares of zero and low emission vehicles. Heavy duty vehicles will be addressed in a separate regulation. The United Nations developed a new technical regulation for passenger car emissions and CO2. This new world light duty test procedure (“WLTP”) is focused primarily on better aligning laboratory CO2 and fuel consumption figures with customer-reported figures. The introduction of WLTP in Europe started in September 2017 and is likely to require updates to CO2 labeling, thereby impacting taxes in countries with a CO2 tax scheme as well as the above-mentioned CO2 fleet regulations for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles. Costs associated with new or incremental testing for WLTP could be significant. Some European countries have implemented or are considering other initiatives for reducing CO2 vehicle emissions, including fiscal measures and CO2 labeling. For example, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Spain, Portugal, and the Netherlands, among others, have introduced taxation based on CO2 emissions. The EU CO2 requirements are likely to trigger further measures. To limit GHG emissions, the EU directive on mobile air conditioning currently requires the replacement of the current refrigerant with a lower “global warming potential” refrigerant for new vehicle types, and for all newly registered vehicles starting in January 2017. A refrigerant change adds considerable costs along the whole manufacturing chain. Other National Requirements. The Canadian federal government has regulated vehicle GHG emissions under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, beginning with the 2011 model year. In October 2014, the Canadian federal government published the final changes to the regulation for light duty vehicles, which maintain alignment with U.S. EPA vehicle GHG standards for the 2017–2025 model years. The final regulation for 2014–2018 heavy duty vehicles was published in February 2013. Part 1 draft regulations for the 2021 model year and beyond were published in March 2017 and are in line with U.S. requirements. Mexico adopted fuel economy/CO2 standards, based on the U.S. One National Program framework, that took effect in 2014. Recently, the government agreed to carryover 2016 model year standards into the 2017 and 2018 model years. Standards for the 2019 model year and later are being developed. Many Asia Pacific countries (such as Australia, China, India, South Korea, Taiwan, and Vietnam) are developing or enforcing fuel efficiency or labeling targets. For example, South Korea has set fuel efficiency targets for 2020, with incentives for early adoption. In September 2017, China published the Method for Parallel Administration on Corporate Average Fuel Consumption of Passenger Car and New Energy Vehicle (“NEV”) Credit, which aims to improve fuel efficiency and to set targets for new energy vehicles. The fuel efficiency targets and NEV mandate will impact the cost of vehicle technology in the future. In South America, Brazil introduced a voluntary vehicle energy-efficiency labeling program, indicating fuel consumption rates for all light-duty vehicles. Brazil has required inclusion of emission classification on fuel economy labels since January 2016. Brazil also published a new automotive regime establishing a minimum absolute CAFE value as a function of Fleet Corporate Average Mass for 2017 light duty vehicles with a spark ignition engine in order to qualify for industrialized products tax reduction. Additional tax reductions are available if further fuel efficiency improvements are achieved and maintained through 2020. Penalties are applied if the energy efficiency levels are not maintained. Brazil reduced the import tax on electric and hybrid cars. The tax rate, which was 35%, will vary from zero to 7%, depending on a vehicle’s energy efficiency. Discussion on new fuel efficiency requirements has started. Chile introduced a tax based on urban fuel consumption and NOx emission for light and medium vehicles beginning in late 2014. In general, fuel efficiency targets may impact the cost of technology of our models in the future. Item 1. Business (Continued) 11 In the Middle East, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia introduced new light duty vehicle fuel economy standards, which are patterned after the U.S. CAFE standard structure, with fuel economy targets following the design of the U.S. 2012–2016 fuel economy standards. The standards became effective on January 1, 2016 and became fully phased in at the end of 2017. Vehicle Safety U.S. Requirements. The National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (the “Safety Act”) regulates vehicles and vehicle equipment in two primary ways. First, the Safety Act prohibits the sale in the United States of any new vehicle or equipment that does not conform to applicable vehicle safety standards established by NHTSA. Meeting or exceeding many safety standards is costly, in part because the standards tend to conflict with the need to reduce vehicle weight in order to meet emission and fuel economy standards. Second, the Safety Act requires that defects related to motor vehicle safety be remedied through safety recall campaigns. A manufacturer is obligated to recall vehicles if it determines the vehicles do not comply with a safety standard. Should we or NHTSA determine that either a safety defect or noncompliance issue exists with respect to any of our vehicles, the cost of such recall campaigns could be substantial. Other National Requirements. The EU and many countries have established vehicle safety standards and regulations, and are likely to adopt additional or more stringent requirements in the future. The European General Safety Regulation introduced UN-ECE regulations, which will be required for the European Type Approval process. EU regulators also are focusing on active safety features such as lane departure warning systems, electronic stability control, and automatic brake assist. Globally, governments generally have been adopting UN-ECE based regulations with minor variations to address local concerns. Any difference between North American and UN-ECE based regulations can add complexity and costs to the development of global platform vehicles, and we continue to support efforts to harmonize regulations to reduce vehicle design complexity while providing a common level of safety performance; several recently launched bilateral negotiations on free trade can potentially contribute to this goal. New safety and recall requirements in China, India, and Gulf Cooperation Council countries also may add substantial costs and complexity to our global recall practice. In South America, additional safety requirements are being introduced or proposed in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, and Uruguay, influenced by The New Car Assessment Program for Latin America and the Caribbean (“Latin NCAP”), which may be a driver for similar actions in other countries. In Canada, regulatory requirements are currently aligned with U.S. regulations. However, under the Canadian Motor Vehicle Safety Act the Minister of Transport has broad powers to order manufacturers to submit a notice of defect or non-compliance when the Minister considers it would be in the interest of safety. In China, a new mandatory Event Data Recorder regulation is under development that is more complex than U.S. requirements, and in China, Malaysia, and South Korea, mandatory e-Call requirements have been drafted. New Car Assessment Programs. Organizations around the globe rate and compare motor vehicles in New Car Assessment Programs (“NCAPs”) to provide consumers with additional information about the safety of new vehicles. NCAPs use crash tests and other evaluations that are different than what is required by applicable regulations, and use stars to rate vehicle safety, with five stars awarded for the highest rating and one for the lowest. Achieving high NCAP ratings can add complexity and cost to vehicles. China finalized the 2018 NCAP protocol with more stringent Pedestrian Protection and Automatic Emergency Braking requirements compared to the United States and Europe. China will also launch a new safety assessment, China Insurance Vehicle Safety Index (“CIVSI”), that is similar to the U.S. IIHS in 2018. Taiwan may also draft NCAP requirements in 2018. Risk Factors. We have listed below (not necessarily in order of importance or probability of occurrence) the most significant risk factors applicable to us: Ford’s long-term competitiveness depends on the successful execution of fitness actions. We have announced fitness redesign plans to transform the operational fitness of our business by becoming more customer centric and adopting processes that emphasize simplicity, speed and agility, efficiency, and accountability. If these fitness actions are not successful, we may not be able to materially lower costs in the near term or improve our competitiveness in the long term, which could have an adverse effect on our profitability. Industry sales volume, particularly in the United States, Europe, or China, could decline if there is a financial crisis, recession, or significant geopolitical event. Because we, like other manufacturers, have a high proportion of relatively fixed structural costs, relatively small changes in industry sales volume can have a substantial effect on our cash flow and profitability. If industry vehicle sales were to decline to levels significantly below our planning assumption, particularly in the United States, Europe, or China, due to a financial crisis, recession, or significant geopolitical event, the decline could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flow. For a discussion of economic trends, see the “Overview” section of Item 7. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 13 Ford’s new and existing products and mobility services are subject to market acceptance. Although we conduct extensive market research before launching new or refreshed vehicles and introducing new services, many factors both within and outside our control affect the success of new or existing products and services in the marketplace. Offering vehicles and services that customers want and value can mitigate the risks of increasing price competition and declining demand, but products and services that are perceived to be less desirable (whether in terms of price, quality, styling, safety, overall value, fuel efficiency, or other attributes) can exacerbate these risks. With increased consumer interconnectedness through the internet, social media, and other media, mere allegations relating to quality, safety, fuel efficiency, corporate social responsibility, or other key attributes can negatively impact our reputation or market acceptance of our products or services, even where such allegations prove to be inaccurate or unfounded. Further, our ability to successfully grow through investments in the area of mobility and electrification depends on many factors, including advancements in technology, regulatory changes, and other factors that are difficult to predict, that may significantly affect the future of autonomous vehicles and mobility services. Rapid changes to our industry, including the introduction of new types of competitors who may possess technological innovations, increase the significance that we are able to anticipate, develop, and deliver products and services that customers desire. Ford’s results are dependent on sales of larger, more profitable vehicles, particularly in the United States. A shift in consumer preferences away from larger, more profitable vehicles (including trucks and SUVs) at levels beyond our current planning assumption—whether because of spiking fuel prices, a decline in the construction industry, government actions or incentives, or other reasons—could result in an immediate and substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Ford may face increased price competition resulting from industry excess capacity, currency fluctuations, or other factors. The global automotive industry is intensely competitive, with manufacturing capacity far exceeding current demand. According to the December 2017 report issued by IHS Automotive, the global automotive industry is estimated to have had excess capacity of about 35 million units in 2017, an increase of about 4 million units from the prior year. Industry overcapacity has resulted in many manufacturers offering marketing incentives on vehicles in an attempt to maintain and grow market share; these incentives historically have included a combination of subsidized financing or leasing programs, price rebates, and other incentives. As a result, we are not necessarily able to set our prices to offset higher costs of marketing incentives, commodity or other cost increases, or the impact of adverse currency fluctuations, including pricing advantages foreign competitors may have because of their weaker home market currencies. Continuation of or increased excess capacity could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Fluctuations in commodity prices, foreign currency exchange rates, and interest rates can have a significant effect on results. As a resource-intensive manufacturing operation, we are exposed to a variety of market risks, including the effects of changes in commodity prices, foreign currency exchange rates, and interest rates. We monitor and manage these exposures as an integral part of our overall risk management program, which recognizes the unpredictability of markets and seeks to reduce potentially adverse effects on our business. Changes in commodity prices, currency exchange rates, and interest rates cannot always be predicted, hedged, or offset with price increases to eliminate earnings volatility. As a result, significant changes in commodity prices, foreign currency exchange rates, or interest rates could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. See “Overview” to Item 7 and Item 7A for additional discussion of currency, commodity price, and interest rate risks. With a global footprint, Ford’s results could be adversely affected by economic, geopolitical, protectionist trade policies, or other events. With the increasing interconnectedness of global economic and financial systems, a financial crisis, natural disaster, geopolitical crisis, or other significant event in one area of the world can have an immediate and material adverse impact on markets around the world. Concerns persist regarding the overall stability of the European Union, given the diverse economic and political circumstances of individual European currency area (“euro area”) countries. These concerns have been exacerbated by Brexit. We have a sterling revenue exposure and a euro cost exposure; a sustained weakening of sterling against euro may have an adverse effect on our profitability. Further, the United Kingdom may be at risk of losing access to free trade agreements for goods and services with the European Union and other countries, which may result in increased tariffs on U.K. imports and exports that could have an adverse effect on our profitability. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 14 We have operations in various markets with volatile economic or political environments and are pursuing growth opportunities in a number of newly developed and emerging markets. These investments may expose us to heightened risks of economic, geopolitical, or other events, including governmental takeover (i.e., nationalization) of our manufacturing facilities or intellectual property, restrictive exchange or import controls, disruption of operations as a result of systemic political or economic instability, outbreak of war or expansion of hostilities, and acts of terrorism, each of which could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Further, the U.S. government, other governments, and international organizations could impose additional sanctions that could restrict us from doing business directly or indirectly in or with certain countries or parties, which could include affiliates. Ford’s production, as well as Ford’s suppliers’ production, could be disrupted by labor disputes, natural or man-made disasters, financial distress, production difficulties, or other factors. A work stoppage or other limitation on production could occur at Ford’s or its suppliers’ facilities for any number of reasons, including as a result of disputes under existing collective bargaining agreements with labor unions or in connection with negotiation of new collective bargaining agreements, or as a result of supplier financial distress or other production constraints or difficulties, or for other reasons. Many components used in our vehicles are available only from a single supplier and therefore cannot be re-sourced quickly or inexpensively to another supplier (due to long lead times, new contractual commitments that may be required by another supplier before ramping up to provide the components or materials, etc.). Such single-source suppliers also could threaten to disrupt our production as leverage in negotiations. A significant disruption to our production schedule could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Ford’s ability to maintain a competitive cost structure could be affected by labor or other constraints. Substantially all of the hourly employees in our Automotive operations in the United States and Canada are represented by unions and covered by collective bargaining agreements. These agreements provide guaranteed wage and benefit levels throughout the contract term and some degree of income security, subject to certain conditions. As a practical matter, these agreements may restrict our ability to close plants and divest businesses. A substantial number of our employees in other regions are represented by unions or government councils, and legislation or custom promoting retention of manufacturing or other employment in the state, country, or region may constrain as a practical matter our ability to sell or close manufacturing or other facilities. Pension and other postretirement liabilities could adversely affect Ford’s liquidity and financial condition. We have defined benefit retirement plans in the United States that cover many of our hourly and salaried employees. We also provide pension benefits to non-U.S. employees and retirees, primarily in Europe. In addition, we and certain of our subsidiaries sponsor plans to provide other postretirement benefits (“OPEB”) for retired employees (primarily health care and life insurance benefits). See Note 17 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for more information about these plans. These benefit plans impose significant liabilities on us and could require us to make additional cash contributions, which could impair our liquidity. If our cash flows and capital resources were insufficient to meet any pension or OPEB obligations, we could be forced to reduce or delay investments and capital expenditures, suspend dividend payments, seek additional capital, or restructure or refinance our indebtedness. Economic and demographic experience for pension and other postretirement benefit plans (e.g., discount rates or investment returns) could be worse than Ford has assumed. The measurement of our obligations, costs, and liabilities associated with benefits pursuant to our pension and other postretirement benefit plans requires that we estimate the present value of projected future payments to all participants. We use many assumptions in calculating these estimates, including assumptions related to discount rates, investment returns on designated plan assets, and demographic experience (e.g., mortality and retirement rates). We generally remeasure these estimates at each year end and recognize any gains or losses associated with changes to our plan assets and liabilities in the year incurred. To the extent actual results are less favorable than our assumptions, we may recognize a substantial remeasurement loss in our results. For discussion of our assumptions, see “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 and Note 17 of the Notes to the Financial Statements. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 15 Ford’s vehicles could be affected by defects that result in delays in new model launches, recall campaigns, or increased warranty costs. Government safety standards require manufacturers to remedy defects related to vehicle safety through safety recall campaigns, and a manufacturer is obligated to recall vehicles if it determines that the vehicles do not comply with a safety standard. NHTSA’s enforcement strategy has shifted to a significant increase in civil penalties levied and the use of consent orders requiring direct oversight by NHTSA of certain manufacturers’ safety processes, a trend that could continue. Should we or government safety regulators determine that a safety or other defect or a noncompliance exists with respect to certain of our vehicles prior to the start of production, the launch of such vehicle could be delayed until such defect is remedied. The costs associated with any protracted delay in new model launches necessary to remedy such defects, or the cost of recall campaigns or warranty costs to remedy such defects in vehicles that have been sold, could be substantial. Such recall and customer satisfaction actions may relate to defective components we receive from suppliers. The cost to complete a recall or customer satisfaction action could be exacerbated to the extent such action relates to a global platform. Furthermore, launch delays or recall actions could adversely affect our reputation or market acceptance of our products as discussed above under “Ford’s new and existing products and mobility services are subject to market acceptance.” Safety, emissions, fuel economy, and other regulations affecting Ford may become more stringent. The worldwide automotive industry is governed by a substantial amount of government regulation, which often differs by state, region, and country. Government regulation has arisen, and proposals for additional regulation are advanced, primarily out of concern for the environment (including concerns about global climate change and its impact), vehicle safety, and energy independence. For example, as discussed above under “Item 1. Business - Governmental Standards,” in the United States the CAFE standards for light duty vehicles increase sharply to approximately 50 mpg by the 2025 model year; EPA’s parallel CO2 emission regulations impose similar standards. California’s ZEV rules also mandate steep increases in the sale of electric vehicles and other advanced technology vehicles through the 2025 model year; even more burdensome regulations are likely to follow. In addition, many governments regulate local product content and/or impose import requirements as a means of creating jobs, protecting domestic producers, and influencing the balance of payments. We are continuing to make changes to our product cycle plan to improve the fuel economy of our petroleumpowered vehicles and to offer more electrified vehicles with lower GHG emissions. There are limits on our ability to achieve fuel economy improvements over a given time frame, however, primarily relating to the cost and effectiveness of available technologies, consumer acceptance of new technologies and changes in vehicle mix, willingness of consumers to absorb the additional costs of new technologies, the appropriateness (or lack thereof) of certain technologies for use in particular vehicles, the widespread availability (or lack thereof) of supporting infrastructure for new technologies, and the human, engineering, and financial resources necessary to deploy new technologies across a wide range of products and powertrains in a short time. The current fuel economy, CO2, and ZEV standards will be difficult to meet if fuel prices remain relatively low and market conditions do not drive consumers to purchase electric vehicles and other highly fuel-efficient vehicles in large numbers. The U.S. government has pursued an enforcement action against a major competitor in connection with its alleged use of “defeat devices” in hundreds of thousands of light duty diesel vehicles, collecting billions of dollars for environmental remediation projects and civil penalties. Several of the competitor’s employees have been indicted on charges of committing federal crimes. The competitor also faces various class action suits, as well as numerous claims and investigations by various U.S. states and other nations. The emergence of this issue has led to increased scrutiny of automaker emission testing by regulators around the world, which in turn has triggered investigations of other manufacturers. These events have led to new regulations, more stringent enforcement programs, requests for field actions, and/or delays in regulatory approvals. The cost to comply with existing government regulations is substantial and additional regulations or changes in consumer preferences that affect vehicle mix could have a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. In addition, a number of governments, as well as non-governmental organizations, publicly assess vehicles to their own protocols. The protocols could change aggressively, and any negative perception regarding the performance of our vehicles subjected to such tests could reduce future sales. For more discussion of the impact of standards on our global business, see the “Governmental Standards” discussion in “Item 1. Business” above. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 16 Ford could experience unusual or significant litigation, governmental investigations, or adverse publicity arising out of alleged defects in products, perceived environmental impacts, or otherwise. We spend substantial resources ensuring that we comply with governmental safety regulations, mobile and stationary source emissions regulations, and other standards. Compliance with governmental standards, however, does not necessarily prevent individual or class actions, which can entail significant cost and risk. In certain circumstances, courts may permit tort claims even where our vehicles comply with federal and/or other applicable law. Furthermore, simply responding to actual or threatened litigation or government investigations of our compliance with regulatory standards, whether related to our products or business or commercial relationships, may require significant expenditures of time and other resources. Litigation also is inherently uncertain, and we could experience significant adverse results. In addition, adverse publicity surrounding an allegation may cause significant reputational harm that could have a significant adverse effect on our sales. Ford’s receipt of government incentives could be subject to reduction, termination, or clawback. We receive economic benefits from national, state, and local governments in various regions of the world in the form of incentives designed to encourage manufacturers to establish, maintain, or increase investment, workforce, or production. These incentives may take various forms, including grants, loan subsidies, and tax abatements or credits. The impact of these incentives can be significant in a particular market during a reporting period. For example, most of our manufacturing facilities in South America are located in Brazil, where the state or federal governments have historically offered, and continue to offer, significant incentives to manufacturers to encourage capital investment, increase manufacturing production, and create jobs. As a result, the performance of our South American operations has been impacted favorably by government incentives to a substantial extent. In Brazil, however, the federal government has levied assessments against us concerning our calculation of federal incentives we received, and certain states have challenged the grant to us of tax incentives by the State of Bahia. A decrease in, expiration without renewal of, or other cessation or clawback of government incentives for any of our business units, as a result of administrative decision or otherwise, could have a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for discussion of our accounting for government incentives, and “Item 3. Legal Proceedings” for a discussion of tax proceedings in Brazil and the potential requirement for us to post collateral. Operational systems, security systems, and vehicles could be affected by cyber incidents. We rely on information technology networks and systems, including in-vehicle systems and mobile devices, some of which are managed by suppliers, to process, transmit, and store electronic information that is important to the operation of our business and our vehicles. Despite security measures, we are at risk for interruptions, outages, and breaches of: (i) operational systems (including business, financial, accounting, product development, consumer receivables, data processing, or manufacturing processes); (ii) facility security systems; and/or (iii) in-vehicle systems or mobile devices. Such cyber incidents could materially disrupt operational systems; result in loss of trade secrets or other proprietary or competitively sensitive information; compromise the privacy of personal information of customers, employees, or others; jeopardize the security of our facilities; affect the performance of in-vehicle systems; and/or impact the safety of our vehicles. A cyber incident could be caused by malicious third parties using sophisticated, targeted methods to circumvent firewalls, encryption, and other security defenses, including hacking, fraud, trickery, or other forms of deception. We have been the target of these types of attacks in the past and such attacks are likely to occur in the future. The techniques used for attacks by third parties change frequently and may become more sophisticated, which may cause cyber incidents to be difficult to detect for long periods of time. Our networks and in-vehicle systems may also be affected by computer viruses or breaches due to the negligence or misconduct of employees, contractors, and/ or others who have access to our networks and systems. A significant cyber incident could impact production capability, harm our reputation, and/or subject us to regulatory actions or litigation. Item 1A. Risk Factors (Continued) 17 Ford Credit’s access to debt, securitization, or derivative markets around the world at competitive rates or in sufficient amounts could be affected by credit rating downgrades, market volatility, market disruption, regulatory requirements, or other factors. Ford Credit’s ability to obtain unsecured funding at a reasonable cost is dependent on its credit ratings or its perceived creditworthiness. Ford Credit’s ability to obtain securitized funding under its committed asset-backed liquidity programs and certain other asset-backed securitization transactions is subject to having a sufficient amount of assets eligible for these programs, as well as Ford Credit’s ability to obtain appropriate credit ratings and, for certain committed programs, derivatives to manage the interest rate risk. Over time, and particularly in the event of any credit rating downgrades, market volatility, market disruption, or other factors, Ford Credit may reduce the amount of receivables it purchases or originates because of funding constraints. In addition, Ford Credit may be limited in the amount of receivables it purchases or originates in certain countries or regions if the local capital markets, particularly in developing countries, do not exist or are not adequately developed. Similarly, Ford Credit may reduce the amount of receivables it purchases or originates if there is a significant decline in the demand for the types of securities it offers or Ford Credit is unable to obtain derivatives to manage the interest rate risk associated with its securitization transactions. A significant reduction in the amount of receivables Ford Credit purchases or originates would significantly reduce its ongoing profits and could adversely affect its ability to support the sale of Ford vehicles. Ford Credit could experience higher-than-expected credit losses, lower-than-anticipated residual values, or higher-than-expected return volumes for leased vehicles. Credit risk is the possibility of loss from a customer’s or dealer’s failure to make payments according to contract terms. Credit risk (which is heavily dependent upon economic factors including unemployment, consumer debt service burden, personal income growth, dealer profitability, and used car prices) has a significant impact on Ford Credit’s business. The level of credit losses Ford Credit may experience could exceed its expectations and adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations. In addition, Ford Credit projects expected residual values (including residual value support payments from Ford) and return volumes for the vehicles it leases. Actual proceeds realized by Ford Credit upon the sale of returned leased vehicles at lease termination may be lower than the amount projected, which would reduce the profitability of the lease transaction. Among the factors that can affect the value of returned lease vehicles are the volume of vehicles returned, economic conditions, marketing programs, and quality or perceived quality, safety, fuel efficiency, or reliability of the vehicles. Actual return volumes may be influenced by these factors, as well as by contractual lease-end values relative to auction values. Each of these factors, alone or in combination, has the potential to adversely affect Ford Credit’s profitability if actual results were to differ significantly from Ford Credit’s projections. See “Critical Accounting Estimates” in Item 7 for additional discussion. Ford Credit could face increased competition from banks, financial institutions, or other third parties seeking to increase their share of financing Ford vehicles. No single company is a dominant force in the automotive finance industry. Most of Ford Credit’s competitors in the United States use credit aggregation systems that permit dealers to send, through standardized systems, retail credit applications to multiple finance sources to evaluate financing options offered by these sources. Also, direct on-line or large dealer group financing options provide consumers with alternative finance sources and/or increased pricing transparency. All of these financing alternatives drive greater competition based on financing rates and terms. Competition from such institutions and alternative finance sources could adversely affect Ford Credit’s profitability and the volume of its retail business. In addition, Ford Credit may face increased competition on wholesale financing for Ford dealers. Ford Credit could be subject to new or increased credit regulations, consumer or data protection regulations, or other regulations. As a finance company, Ford Credit is highly regulated by governmental authorities in the locations in which it operates, which can impose significant additional costs and/or restrictions on its business. In the United States, for example, Ford Credit’s operations are subject to regulation, supervision, and licensing under various federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including the federal Truth-in-Lending Act, Consumer Leasing Act, Equal Credit Opportunity Act, and Fair Credit Reporting Act. The Dodd-Frank Act directs federal agencies to adopt rules to regulate the consumer finance industry and the capital markets and gives the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (“CFPB”) broad rule-making and enforcement authority for a wide range of consumer financial protection laws that regulate consumer finance businesses, such as Ford Credit’s retail automotive financing business. Exercise of these powers by the CFPB may increase the costs of, impose additional restrictions on, or otherwise adversely affect companies in the automotive finance business. The CFPB has authority to supervise and examine the largest nonbank automotive finance companies, such as Ford Credit, for compliance with consumer financial protection laws. Key Economic Factors and Trends Affecting the Automotive Industry Currency Exchange Rate Volatility. The U.S. Federal Reserve raised its policy interest rate three times in 2017, after single rate increases in 2015 and 2016. Central banks in other developed markets have also initiated or signaled the end of an extended period of monetary policy easing. The related shifts in capital flows have contributed to increased volatility for both developed and emerging market currencies globally. Emerging markets also face differing inflation backdrops and, in some cases, political instability, contributing to unpredictable movements in the value of their exchange rates. In addition to direct impacts on the financial flows of global automotive companies, currency movements can also impact pricing of vehicles exported to overseas markets, most notably in the case of the yen. In most markets, exchange rates are market-determined, and all are impacted by many different macroeconomic and policy factors, and thus likely to remain volatile. However, in some markets, exchange rates are heavily influenced or controlled by governments. Excess Capacity. According to IHS Automotive, an automotive research firm, the estimated automotive industry global production capacity for light vehicles of about 130 million units exceeded global production by about 35 million units in 2017. In North America and Europe, two regions where a significant share of industry revenue is earned, excess capacity as a percent of production was an estimated 17% and 20%, respectively, in 2017. In China, the auto industry also witnessed excess capacity at 57% of production in 2017, as manufacturers compete to capitalize on China’s future market potential. According to production capacity data projected by IHS Automotive, global excess capacity conditions could continue for several years at an average of about 40 million units per year during the period from 2018 to 2023. Pricing Pressure. Excess capacity, coupled with a proliferation of new products being introduced in key segments, will keep pressure on manufacturers’ ability to increase prices. In North America, the industry restructuring of the past few years has allowed manufacturers to better match production with demand, although Japanese and Korean manufacturers also have capacity located outside of the region directed to North America. In the future, Chinese and Indian manufacturers are expected to enter U.S. and European markets, further intensifying competition. Over the long term, intense competition and excess capacity will continue to put downward pressure on inflation-adjusted prices for similarlycontented vehicles in the United States and contribute to a challenging pricing environment for the automotive industry. In Europe, the excess capacity situation was exacerbated by weakening demand and the lack of reductions in existing capacity, such that negative pricing pressure is expected to continue for the foreseeable future. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) 28 Commodity and Energy Price Changes. The price of oil has increased since late 2017, supported by global demand growth and an extended agreement among oil-producing nations to maintain modest output reductions. Still, oil prices remain well below prior peaks. In addition, after several years of low prices, stronger global demand has put upward pressure on other commodity prices, including steel, aluminum, and other metals used in the manufacturing of our vehicles. Vehicle Profitability. Our financial results depend on the profitability of the vehicles we sell, which may vary significantly by vehicle line. In general, larger vehicles tend to command higher prices and be more profitable than smaller vehicles, both across and within vehicle segments. For example, in North America, our larger, more profitable vehicles had an average contribution margin that was about 135% of our total average contribution margin across all vehicles, whereas our smaller vehicles had significantly lower contribution margins. In addition, government regulations aimed at reducing emissions and increasing fuel efficiency may increase the cost of vehicles by more than the perceived benefit to the consumer. Given the backdrop of excess capacity, these regulations could dampen contribution margins. Trade Policy. To the extent governments in various regions erect or intensify barriers to imports, or implement currency policy that advantages local exporters selling into the global marketplace, there can be a significant negative impact on manufacturers based in markets that promote free trade. While we believe the long-term trend is toward the growth of free trade, we have noted with concern recent developments in a number of regions. In Asia Pacific, for example, a weak yen significantly reduces the cost of exports into the United States, Europe, and other global markets by Japanese manufacturers. Over a period of time, a weak yen can contribute to other countries pursuing weak currency policies by intervening in the exchange rate markets. This is particularly likely in other Asian countries, such as South Korea. We will continue to monitor and address developing issues around trade policy. Other Economic Factors. Although in recent months interest rates have risen, mature market government bond yields and inflation have remained lower than expected. At the same time, government deficits and debt remain at high levels in many major markets. The eventual implications of higher government deficits and debt, with potentially higher long-term interest rates, may drive a higher cost of capital over our planning period. Higher interest rates and/or taxes to address the higher deficits also may impede real growth in gross domestic product and, therefore, vehicle sales over our planning period. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) 29 Trends and Strategies Cities are becoming more congested. Fortunately, vehicles that move people in city infrastructures are becoming smarter. Our opportunity is to leverage the capability of smart vehicles in smart environments to attack the congestion problem through a new transportation operating system. We also have an opportunity to improve logistics. Currently, there is an inefficient operating system for the delivery of goods. The growth of internet sales has resulted in more deliveries, which is compounding the problem of city congestion. We can imagine a world where smart vehicles in a smart world improve traffic flow, reduce congestion, and improve logistics. In response to these trends, we refined our strategy in 2017 to focus on resetting revenue and attacking costs in the short-term, and redesigning our business to compete and win in the future. To that end, we have identified five priorities: 1. Rapidly improving our fitness to lower costs, release capital, and finance growth 2. Accelerating the introduction of connected, smart vehicles and services 3. Re-allocating capital to where we can win in the future 4. Continuously innovating to create the most human-centered mobility solutions 5. Empowering our team to work together effectively to compete and win In 2017, we took several actions to help achieve these priorities, including: • We launched fitness redesign efforts that are focused on customer centricity, simplicity, speed and agility, efficiency, and accountability • We announced collaborations with Dominos, Lyft, and Postmates in the United States to support autonomous vehicle development and testing. We also announced collaborations with Mahindra in India and Zotye in China to provide access to technology, capabilities, and scale that will enhance our competitive position • We invested in Autonomic to accelerate growth in digital services • We announced a plan to achieve 100% connectivity for new vehicles in the United States by 2019 and 90% globally by 2020 • We announced that we are shifting toward a lower volume passenger car lineup in North America and Europe, and we are playing to our strengths by investing in authentic off-roaders and high performance city crossovers • We announced a plan to launch a performance SUV battery electric vehicle that offers at least a 300-mile range At the start of 2018, we announced a plan to increase our investment in electrification—expected to be over $11 billion by 2022—to substantially increase the number of battery electric vehicles we offer around the world. And we will have more to announce in 2018 as we remain focused on designing smart vehicles for a smart world that help people move more safely, confidently, and freely. ENGINEERING, RESEARCH, AND DEVELOPMENT We engage in engineering, research, and development primarily to improve the performance (including fuel efficiency), safety, and customer satisfaction of our products, and to develop new products and services. Engineering, research, and development expenses for 2015, 2016, and 2017 were $6.7 billion, $7.3 billion, and $8 billion, respectively.

GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

PART I

Item 1. Business
General Motors Company (sometimes referred to as we, our, us, ourselves, the Company, General Motors, or GM) was incorporated as a Delaware corporation in 2009. We design, build and sell trucks, crossovers, cars and automobile parts worldwide. We also provide automotive financing services through General Motors Financial Company, Inc. (GM Financial). Except for per share amounts or as otherwise specified, amounts presented within tables are stated in millions.
On July 31, 2017 we closed the sale of the Opel and Vauxhall businesses and certain other assets in Europe (the Opel/Vauxhall Business) to Peugeot, S.A. (PSA Group). On October 31, 2017 we closed the sale of the European financing subsidiaries and branches (the Fincos, and together with the Opel/Vauxhall Business, the European Business) to Banque PSA Finance S.A. and BNP Paribas Personal Finance S.A. The European Business is presented as discontinued operations in our consolidated financial statements for all periods presented. Unless otherwise indicated, information in this report relates to our continuing operations.

Automotive Our automotive operations meet the demands of our customers through our automotive segments: GM North America (GMNA) and GM International (GMI). GMNA meets the demands of customers in North America with vehicles developed, manufactured and/or marketed under the Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet and GMC brands. GMI primarily meets the demands of customers outside North America with vehicles developed, manufactured and/or marketed under the Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet, GMC and Holden brands. We also have equity ownership stakes in entities that meet the demands of customers in other countries, primarily in China, with vehicles developed, manufactured and/or marketed under the Baojun, Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet, Jiefang and Wuling brands.

In addition to the vehicles we sell through our dealer network to retail customers, we also sell vehicles directly or through our dealer network to fleet customers, including daily rental car companies, commercial fleet customers, leasing companies and governments. Our customers can obtain a wide range of aftersale vehicle services and products through our dealer network, such as maintenance, light repairs, collision repairs, vehicle accessories and extended service warranties.

Competitive Position and Vehicle Sales The principal factors that determine consumer vehicle preferences in the markets in which we operate include overall vehicle design, price, quality, available options, safety, reliability, fuel economy and functionality. Market leadership in individual countries in which we compete varies widely.

We present both wholesale and total vehicle sales data to assist in the analysis of our revenue and our market share. Wholesale vehicle sales data consists of sales to GM's dealers and distributors as well as sales to the U.S. Government, and excludes vehicles sold by our joint ventures. Wholesale vehicle sales data correlates to our revenue recognized from the sale of vehicles, which is the largest component of Automotive net sales and revenue. In the year ended December 31, 2018 36% of our wholesale vehicle sales volume was generated outside the U.S. The following table summarizes wholesale vehicle sales by automotive segment (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2018

2017

2016
GMNA(a)
3,555


75.5
%

3,511


73.5
%

3,958


75.9
%
GMI(b)
1,152


24.5
%

1,267


26.5
%

1,255


24.1
%
Total
4,707


100.0
%

4,778


100.0
%

5,213


100.0
%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Discontinued operations
?

 

 
696

 

 
1,199

 

__________
(a)
Wholesale vehicle sales related to transactions with the European Business were insignificant for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016.
(b)
Wholesale vehicle sales include 131 and 128 vehicles related to transactions with the European Business for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016.

Total vehicle sales data represents: (1) retail sales (i.e., sales to consumers who purchase new vehicles from dealers or distributors); (2) fleet sales, such as sales to large and small businesses, governments, and daily rental car companies; and (3) vehicles used by dealers in their businesses, including courtesy transportation vehicles. Total vehicle sales data includes all sales by joint ventures on a total vehicle basis, not based on our percentage ownership interest in the joint venture. Certain joint venture agreements in China allow for the contractual right to report vehicle sales of non-GM trademarked vehicles by those joint ventures, which are included in the total vehicle sales we report for China. While total vehicle sales data does not correlate directly to the revenue we

1


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

recognize during a particular period, we believe it is indicative of the underlying demand for our vehicles. Total vehicle sales data represents management's good faith estimate based on sales reported by GM's dealers, distributors, and joint ventures, commercially available data sources such as registration and insurance data, and internal estimates and forecasts when other data is not available.

The following table summarizes total industry vehicle sales and our related competitive position by geographic region (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2018

2017

2016
 
Industry
 
GM
 
Market Share
 
Industry
 
GM
 
Market Share
 
Industry
 
GM
 
Market Share
North America
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
United States
17,694


2,954


16.7
%

17,570


3,002


17.1
%

17,886


3,043


17.0
%
Other
3,835


536


14.0
%

3,986


574


14.4
%

3,993


587


14.7
%
Total North America(a)
21,529


3,490


16.2
%

21,556


3,576


16.6
%

21,879


3,630


16.6
%
Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

China(b)
26,466


3,645


13.8
%

28,231


4,041


14.3
%

28,274


3,914


13.8
%
Other(c)
22,252


555


2.5
%

21,287


629


3.0
%

20,602


720


3.5
%
Total Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa(a)
48,718


4,200


8.6
%

49,518


4,670


9.4
%

48,876


4,634


9.5
%
South America

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Brazil
2,566


434


16.9
%

2,239


394


17.6
%

2,050


346


16.9
%
Other
1,919


256


13.3
%

1,928


275


14.3
%

1,623


237


14.6
%
Total South America(a)
4,485


690


15.4
%

4,167


669


16.1
%

3,673


583


15.9
%
Total in GM markets
74,732


8,380


11.2
%

75,241


8,915


11.8
%

74,428


8,847


11.9
%
Total Europe
19,045


4


?
%

19,190


685


3.6
%

18,620


1,161


6.2
%
Total Worldwide(d)
93,777


8,384


8.9
%

94,431


9,600


10.2
%

93,048


10,008


10.8
%
United States


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Cars
5,361


560


10.4
%

6,145


709


11.5
%

6,897


890


12.9
%
Trucks
5,361


1,360


25.4
%

5,041


1,328


26.3
%

4,911


1,325


27.0
%
Crossovers
6,972


1,034


14.8
%

6,384


965


15.1
%

6,078


828


13.6
%
Total United States
17,694


2,954


16.7
%

17,570


3,002


17.1
%

17,886


3,043


17.0
%
China(b)
 
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


SGMS
 

1,749








1,906








1,806




SGMW and FAW-GM
 

1,896








2,135








2,108




Total China
26,466


3,645


13.8
%

28,231


4,041


14.3
%

28,274


3,914


13.8
%
__________
(a)
Sales of Opel/Vauxhall outside of Europe were insignificant in the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016.
(b)
Includes sales by the Automotive China JVs SAIC General Motors Sales Co., Ltd. (SGMS), SAIC GM Wuling Automobile Co., Ltd. (SGMW) and FAW-GM Light Duty Commercial Vehicle Co., Ltd. (FAW-GM). In the year ended December 31, 2016 wholesale volumes were used for Industry, GM and Market Share. Our total vehicle sales in China were 3,871 in the year ended December 31, 2016.
(c)
Includes Industry and GM sales in India and South Africa where we ceased vehicle sales for those domestic markets as of December 31, 2017.
(d)
Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Sudan and Syria are subject to broad economic sanctions. Accordingly these countries are excluded from industry sales data and corresponding calculation of market share.

In the year ended December 31, 2018 we estimate we had the number one market share in each of North America and South America, and the number three market share in the Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa region, which included the number two market share in China. Refer to the Overview in Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) for discussion on changes in market share by region.

2


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


As discussed above, total vehicle sales and market share data provided in the table above includes fleet vehicles. Certain fleet transactions, particularly sales to daily rental car companies, are generally less profitable than retail sales to end customers. Prior to January 1, 2018 a significant portion of the sales to daily rental car companies were recorded as operating leases under U.S. GAAP with no recognition of revenue at the date of initial delivery due to guaranteed repurchase obligations. Beginning January 1, 2018, a significant portion of the sales to daily rental car companies are recorded as sales at the time of delivery to daily rental car companies. The following table summarizes estimated fleet sales and those sales as a percentage of total vehicle sales (vehicles in thousands):
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2018
 
2017
 
2016
GMNA
740


691


707

GMI
478


541


527

Total fleet sales
1,218


1,232


1,234

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fleet sales as a percentage of total vehicle sales
14.5
%

13.8
%

13.9
%

Product Pricing Several methods are used to promote our products, including the use of dealer, retail and fleet incentives such as customer rebates and finance rate support. The level of incentives is dependent upon the level of competition in the markets in which we operate and the level of demand for our products.

Cyclical Nature of Business Retail sales are cyclical and production varies from month to month. Vehicle model changeovers occur throughout the year as a result of new market entries. The market for vehicles depends in part on general economic conditions, credit availability and consumer spending.

Relationship with Dealers We market vehicles and automotive parts worldwide primarily through a network of independent authorized retail dealers. These outlets include distributors, dealers and authorized sales, service and parts outlets.

The following table summarizes the number of authorized dealerships:
 
December 31, 2018
 
December 31, 2017
 
December 31, 2016
GMNA
4,793

 
4,809

 
4,857

GMI
7,716

 
7,641

 
8,598

Total
12,509

 
12,450

 
13,455


We and our joint ventures enter into a contract with each authorized dealer agreeing to sell to the dealer one or more specified product lines at wholesale prices and granting the dealer the right to sell those vehicles to retail customers from an approved location. Our dealers often offer more than one GM brand at a single dealership in a number of our markets. Authorized dealers offer parts, accessories, service and repairs for GM vehicles in the product lines that they sell using GM parts and accessories. Our dealers are authorized to service GM vehicles under our limited warranty program and those repairs are made only with GM parts. Our dealers generally provide their customers with access to credit or lease financing, vehicle insurance and extended service contracts provided by GM Financial and other financial institutions.

The quality of GM dealerships and our relationship with our dealers and distributors are critical to our success as dealers maintain the primary sales and service interface with the end consumer of our products. In addition to the terms of our contracts with our dealers, we are regulated by various country and state franchise laws and regulations that may supersede those contractual terms and impose specific regulatory requirements and standards for initiating dealer network changes, pursuing terminations for cause and other contractual matters.

Research, Product and Business Development and Intellectual Property Costs for research, manufacturing engineering, product engineering and design and development activities relate primarily to developing new products or services or improving existing products or services, including activities related to vehicle and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions control, improved fuel economy, electrification, autonomous vehicles, the safety of drivers and passengers, and urban mobility. Research and development expenses were $7.8 billion, $7.3 billion and $6.6 billion in the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016.


3


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Product Development The Product Development organization is responsible for designing and integrating vehicle and propulsion components to maximize part sharing across multiple vehicle segments. Global teams in Design, Program Management, Component & Subsystem Engineering, Product Integrity, Safety, Propulsion Systems and Purchasing & Supply Chain collaborate to meet customer requirements and maximize global economies of scale.

Our global vehicle architecture development is headquartered at our Global Technical Center in Warren, Michigan. Cross-segment part sharing is an essential enabler to optimize our current vehicle portfolio, as we expect that more than 75% of our global sales volume will come from five vehicle architectures by early next decade. We will continue to leverage our current architecture portfolio to accommodate our customers around the world while achieving our financial goals.

In November 2018 we announced plans to transform our product development and optimize our product portfolio. We are evolving our global product development workforce and processes to drive world-class levels of engineering in advanced technologies and to improve quality and speed to market.

Hybrid, Plug-In, Extended Range and Battery Electric Vehicles We are investing in multiple technologies offering increasing levels of vehicle electrification including eAssist, plug-in hybrid, full hybrid, extended range and zero emission battery electric vehicles that are part of our long-term strategy to reduce petroleum consumption and GHG emissions. We currently offer seven 2018 model year vehicles in the U.S. featuring some form of electrification and continue to develop plug-in hybrid electric vehicle technology and extended range electric vehicles such as the Chevrolet Bolt EV.

Car- and Ride-Sharing Maven is a shared vehicle marketplace that leverages a versatile software and operational platform to provide members with on-demand access to vehicles through two primary services, Maven Gig and Maven Car Sharing. Maven Gig allows members to access vehicles that can be used in ride-sharing and delivery with companies such as Uber Technologies Inc. and GrubHub Inc. Maven Car Sharing is a consumer service that provides on-demand access to Maven owned and peer-owned vehicles through a new peer-to-peer car-sharing offering. Maven is available in 24 cities across the U.S., Canada and Australia. Through December 31, 2018 Maven Gig and Maven Car Sharing have accumulated in aggregate over 171 million miles driven, 34 million all-electric miles driven and 247,000 reservations. Maven now has 190,000 members.

Autonomous Technology We see autonomous technology leading to a future of zero crashes, zero emissions and zero congestion, since more than 90% of crashes are caused by driver error, according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). We are among the leaders in the industry with significant global real-world experience in delivering connectivity and advanced safety features that are the building blocks to more advanced automation features that are driving our leadership position in the development of autonomous technology. An example of advanced technology is Super Cruise, a driver assistance feature that enables hands-free driving on the highway, which will be expanded to all Cadillac models, with roll-out beginning in 2020.

We are actively testing autonomous vehicles in San Francisco, California; Scottsdale, Arizona; and Michigan. Gated by safety and regulation, we continue to make rapid progress toward commercialization of a network of on-demand autonomous vehicles in the U.S.

In January 2018 we revealed the Cruise AV, a production-intent self-driving vehicle that was engineered from the start to operate safely on its own, with no driver.

In May 2018 SoftBank Vision Fund (The Vision Fund) agreed to invest in GM Cruise, our global segment responsible for the development and commercialization of autonomous vehicle technology. In addition, in October 2018 we reached an agreement to work jointly with Honda Motor Co., Ltd (Honda) to fund and develop a shared autonomous vehicle (SAV) for GM Cruise that can serve a wide variety of use cases and be manufactured at high volume. For additional information on third-party investments in GM Cruise, refer to the Overview section of the Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A).

Alternative Fuel Vehicles We believe alternative fuels offer significant potential to reduce petroleum consumption and resulting GHG emissions in the transportation sector. By leveraging experience and capability developed around these technologies in our global operations we continue to develop FlexFuel vehicles that can run on ethanol-gasoline blend fuels as well as technologies that support compressed natural gas and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG).

We offer a variety of FlexFuel vehicles in the U.S. for the 2019 model year to retail and fleet customers capable of operating on gasoline, E85 ethanol or any combination of the two. In Brazil, a substantial majority of vehicles sold are FlexFuel vehicles capable

4


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

of running on high ethanol blends. We also market FlexFuel vehicles in other global markets where biofuels are in the marketplace. We support the development of biodiesel blend fuels, which are alternative diesel fuels produced from renewable sources.

Hydrogen Fuel Cell Technology Another part of our long-term strategy to reduce petroleum consumption and GHG emissions is our commitment to the development of our hydrogen fuel cell technology. Our Chevrolet Equinox fuel cell electric vehicle demonstration programs, such as Project Driveway, have accumulated more than three million miles of real-world driving. These programs are helping us identify consumer and infrastructure needs to understand the business case for potential production of vehicles with this technology. We are exploring non-traditional automotive uses for fuel cells in several areas, including demonstrations with the U.S. Army and U.S. Navy.

We signed a co-development agreement and established a nonconsolidated JV with Honda in 2016 for a next-generation fuel cell system and hydrogen storage technologies, aiming for commercialization in the early 2020s. We expect the collaboration to succeed by sharing expertise, economies of scale and common sourcing strategies and building upon GM's and Honda's strengths as leaders in hydrogen fuel cell technology.

OnStar and Vehicle Connectivity OnStar, LLC (OnStar) provides subscription-based and complementary services to more than 20 million connected vehicles globally. OnStar provides connected safety, security and mobility solutions for retail and fleet customers, including automatic crash response, stolen vehicle assistance, roadside assistance, dealer maintenance notifications, remote door unlock, turn-by-turn navigation, vehicle location services, hands-free calling, Smart Driver and Marketplace. OnStar also offers additional connectivity packages that include remote vehicle access through a mobile application, on-demand vehicle diagnostics, connected navigation and 4G LTE wireless connectivity.

Intellectual Property We generate and hold a significant number of patents in a number of countries in connection with the operation of our business. While none of these patents are individually material to our business as a whole, these patents are important to our operations and continued technological development. We hold a number of trademarks and service marks that are very important to our identity and recognition in the marketplace.

Raw Materials, Services and Supplies We purchase a wide variety of raw materials, parts, supplies, energy, freight, transportation and other services from numerous suppliers to manufacture our products. The raw materials primarily include steel, aluminum, resins, copper, lead and platinum group metals. We have not experienced any significant shortages of raw materials and normally do not carry substantial inventories of such raw materials in excess of levels reasonably required to meet our production requirements. We continue to experience higher commodity costs and anticipate higher costs associated with tariffs.

In some instances, we purchase systems, components, parts and supplies from a single source and may be at an increased risk for supply disruptions. The inability or unwillingness of these sources to supply us with parts and supplies could have a material adverse effect on our production capacity. Combined purchases from our two largest suppliers have been approximately 12% of our total purchases in each of the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016. Refer to Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of these risks.

Environmental and Regulatory Matters

Automotive Emissions Control We are subject to laws and regulations that require us to control automotive emissions, including vehicle and engine exhaust emission standards, vehicle evaporative emission standards and onboard diagnostic (OBD) system requirements. Advanced OBD systems are used to identify and diagnose problems with emission control systems. Problems detected by the OBD system and other in-use compliance monitoring activities may increase warranty costs and the likelihood of recall. Emission and OBD requirements have become more stringent as a result of lower emission standards and new diagnostic requirements that have come into force in many markets around the world driven by policy priorities such as air quality, energy security and climate change, often with very little harmonization. While we believe all of our products are designed and manufactured in material compliance with substantially all vehicle emissions requirements, regulatory authorities may conduct ongoing evaluations of the emissions compliance of products from all manufacturers. This includes vehicle emissions testing, including CO2 and nitrogen oxide emissions testing, and review of emission control designs and strategies.

The U.S. federal government, through the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), imposes stringent exhaust and evaporative emission control requirements on vehicles sold in the U.S. The California Air Resources Board (CARB) likewise imposes stringent exhaust and evaporative emission standards, as well as the requirement that increasing percentages of Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEVs) must be sold in California. The Clean Air Act permits states that have areas with air quality compliance issues to adopt California emission standards in lieu of federal requirements. Thirteen states have adopted California emission standards, and ten

5


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

of these have adopted the ZEV requirements. There is a possibility that additional U.S. jurisdictions could adopt California emissions and ZEV requirements in the future.

Although the EPA has not imposed ZEV requirements, the EPA and California's emissions control standards will likely increase the time and mileage periods over which manufacturers are responsible for a vehicle's emission performance. The Canadian federal government's vehicle emission requirements are generally aligned with the U.S. federal requirements. The Canadian province of Quebec has adopted ZEV requirements starting with the 2018 model year largely based on California program requirements.

Each model year we must obtain certification that our vehicles and heavy-duty engines will meet emission requirements of the EPA before we can sell vehicles in the U.S. and Canada, and of the CARB before we can sell vehicles in California and other states that have adopted the California emissions requirements.

China implemented the China 5 emission standard nationwide at the beginning of 2017. China 5 is more stringent than the previous program on all levels including overall emission requirements and the time and mileage period for which vehicles need to meet China 5 level performance. China will implement a unique China 6 emission standard that combines elements of both European and U.S. standards and includes more stringent emission requirements and increases the time and mileage periods over which manufacturers are responsible for a vehicle's emission performance. Nationwide implementation for new registrations is expected in July 2020 for China 6a and July 2023 for the more stringent China 6b standard. Localities can pull ahead China 6 requirements if certain criteria are met. The majority of cities that have announced plans to implement China 6 early have projected implementation in July 2019, but one city has indicated implementation in the three months ended March 31, 2019. For additional information, refer to Item 1A. Risk Factors.

In South America certain countries follow the U.S. test procedures, standards and OBD requirements and others follow the European Union test procedures, standards and OBD requirements with different levels of stringency. Brazil implemented national L6 standards for light diesel vehicles in 2012 and OBD installation for light diesel vehicles in 2015. L6 standards for light gasoline vehicles were implemented in 2015 for all models.

As a result of the sale of the Opel/Vauxhall Business, GM抯 vehicle presence in Europe is smaller, but GM may still be affected by actions taken by regulators related both to Opel/Vauxhall vehicles sold before the sale of the Opel/Vauxhall Business as well as to other vehicles GM continues to sell in Europe. In the European Union, increased scrutiny of compliance with emissions standards may result in changes to these standards, including implementation of 搑eal world driving?emissions tests, as well as stricter interpretations or redefinition of these standards and more rigorous enforcement. For example, our former German subsidiary has participated in continuing discussions with German and European authorities concerning emissions control systems. For additional information, refer to Note 22 to our consolidated financial statements.

Automotive Fuel Economy In the U.S., the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) promulgates and enforces Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards for three separate fleets: domestically produced cars, imported cars and light-duty trucks. Manufacturers are subject to substantial civil penalties if they fail to meet the applicable CAFE standard in any model year, after taking into account all available credits for the preceding five model years and expected credits for the three succeeding model years, including credits obtained from other manufacturers. In addition to federal CAFE, the EPA promulgates and enforces GHG emission standards, which are effectively fuel economy standards because the majority of vehicle GHG emissions are carbon dioxide emissions that are emitted in direct proportion to the amount of fuel burned by a vehicle. The EPA and NHTSA also regulate the fuel efficiency and GHG emissions of medium- and heavy-duty vehicles, imposing more stringent standards over time.

In Canada, light-duty and heavy-duty GHG regulations are currently patterned after the existing EPA GHG emission standards. However, with both the U.S. and Canadian governments reviewing potential changes to these existing regulations and the difference in each country's climate change policies, there is an increased risk that future Canadian light-duty GHG regulations may not be aligned with future EPA regulations. In addition, CARB has asserted the right to promulgate and enforce its own state GHG standards for motor vehicles, and other states have asserted the right to adopt the California standards. Until recently, CARB regulations have provided that compliance with the federal EPA light-duty GHG program is deemed to be in compliance with the California standards through the 2025 model year. However, on December 12, 2018 CARB amended this regulation to clarify that, in the event the EPA alters the GHG stringency by means of the now-pending EPA GHG rulemaking, compliance with the EPA's GHG emissions standards will no longer be deemed in compliance with CARB's requirements. As a result, depending on the outcome of the EPA GHG rulemaking and finality of CARB's regulatory amendment in the future GM might be required to meet California standards that are different than the EPA GHG standards.


6


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

China has two fuel economy requirements for passenger vehicles: an individual vehicle pass-fail type approval requirement and a fleet average fuel consumption requirement. With a focus on the fleet average program, the current China Phase 4 fleet fuel consumption requirement, which went into effect in 2016, is based on curb weight with full compliance to 5.0L/100 km required by 2020. China Phase 4 has continued subsidies for plug-in hybrid, battery electric and fuel cell vehicles. China Phase 5 is currently being developed with a planned start in 2021 with full compliance to 4.0L/100km required by 2025. In addition, China has established the New Energy Vehicle (NEV) Mandate which will require passenger car manufacturers to produce a certain volume of plug-in hybrid, battery electric and fuel cell vehicles to generate "credits" equivalent to 10% in 2019 and 12% in 2020 against the internal combustion engine vehicle production volume. The number of credits per car is based on the level of electric range and energy efficiency. The NEV Mandate requirement for 2021 to 2025 currently is being developed with a goal of NEV volume reaching 20% of total vehicle volume in 2025.

Regulators in other jurisdictions have already adopted or are developing fuel economy or carbon dioxide regulations. If regulators in these jurisdictions seek to impose and enforce emission standards that are misaligned with market conditions, we may be forced to take various actions to increase market support programs for more fuel-efficient vehicles and curtail production of certain high-performance cars, trucks and sport utility vehicles (SUVs) in order to achieve compliance. We regularly evaluate our current and future product plans and strategies for compliance with fuel economy and GHG regulations.

Industrial Environmental Control Our operations are subject to a wide range of environmental protection laws including those regulating air emissions, water discharge, waste management and environmental cleanup. Certain environmental statutes require that responsible parties fund remediation actions regardless of fault, legality of original disposal or ownership of a disposal site. Under certain circumstances these laws impose joint and several liability as well as liability for related damages to natural resources.

To mitigate the effects of our worldwide operations on the environment, we are converting as many of our worldwide operations as practicable to landfill-free operations which reduces GHG emissions associated with waste disposal. At December 31, 2018, 75 (or approximately 50%) of our manufacturing operations and 61 of our non-manufacturing operations were landfill-free, including idled facilities. At our landfill-free manufacturing operations approximately 94% of waste materials are composted, reused, or recycled and approximately 5% are converted to energy at waste-to-energy facilities. In 2018 we estimate that our waste reduction program diverted 1.6 million metric tons of waste from landfill, resulting in approximately 6.9 million metric tons of GHG emissions avoided in global manufacturing operations, including construction, demolition and remediation wastes.

In addition to minimizing our impact on the environment, our landfill-free program and total waste reduction commitments generate revenue from the sale of production by-products, reduce our use of material, reduce our carbon footprint and help to reduce the risks and financial liabilities associated with waste disposal.

We continue to search for ways to increase our use of renewable energy, improve our energy efficiency and work to drive growth and scale of renewables. We are committed to meeting the electricity needs of our operations worldwide with renewable energy by 2050. At December 31, 2018 we had implemented projects or signed renewable energy contracts globally that had increased our total renewable energy capacity to over 400 megawatts, which represents approximately 20% of our global electricity use. In 2018, several wind farms totaling approximately 250 megawatts now match the load of GM facilities in Texas, Ohio and Indiana. We continue to seek opportunities for a diversified renewable energy portfolio including wind, solar, and landfill gas. In 2018 Energy Star certified one assembly plant in Canada through Natural Resources Canada and 17 buildings in the U.S. for superior energy management. We also met the EPA Energy Star Challenge for Industry (EPA Challenge) at eight additional sites globally by reducing energy intensity an average of 13% at these sites within 2.5 years. To meet the EPA Challenge, industrial sites must reduce energy intensity by 10% within a five year period. In total 75 GM-owned manufacturing sites have met the EPA Challenge, with many sites achieving the goal multiple times for a total of 137 recognitions. These efforts minimize our utility expenses and are part of our approach to addressing climate change through setting a GHG emissions reduction target, collecting accurate data, following our business plan to operate more efficiently and publicly reporting progress against our target.

Chemical Regulations We continually monitor the implementation of chemical regulations to maintain compliance and evaluate their effect on our business, suppliers and the automotive industry.

Globally, governmental agencies continue to introduce new legislation and regulations related to the selection and use of chemicals by mandating broad prohibitions or restrictions and implementing green chemistry, life cycle analysis and product stewardship initiatives. These initiatives give broad regulatory authority to ban or restrict the use of certain chemical substances and potentially affect automobile manufacturers' responsibilities for vehicle components at the end of a vehicle's life, as well as chemical selection for product development and manufacturing. Global treaties and initiatives such as the Stockholm, Basel and Rotterdam

7


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Conventions on Chemicals and Waste and the Minamata Convention on Mercury, are driving chemical regulations across signatory countries. In addition, more global jurisdictions are establishing substance standards with regard to Vehicle Interior Air Quality.

Chemical regulations are increasing in North America. In the U.S. the EPA is moving forward with risk analysis and management of high priority chemicals under the authority of the 2016 Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act, and several U.S. states have chemical management regulations that can affect vehicle design such as the California and Washington laws banning the use of copper in brake friction material. Chemical restrictions in Canada continue to progress rapidly as a result of Environment Canada's Chemical Management Plan to assess existing substances and implement risk management controls on any chemical deemed toxic.

China prohibits the use of several chemical substances in vehicles. There are also various regulations in China stipulating the requirements for chemical management. Among other things, these regulations catalogue and restrict the use and the import and export of various chemical substances. The failure of our joint venture partners or our suppliers to comply with these regulations could disrupt production in China or prevent our joint venture partners from selling the affected products in the China market.

These emerging regulations will potentially lead to increases in costs and supply chain complexity. We believe that we are materially in compliance with substantially all of these requirements or expect to be materially in compliance by the required dates.

Safety In the U.S. the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 prohibits the sale of any new vehicle or equipment in the U.S. that does not conform to applicable vehicle safety standards established by NHTSA. If we or NHTSA determine that either a vehicle or vehicle equipment does not comply with a safety standard or if a vehicle defect creates an unreasonable safety risk the manufacturer is required to notify owners and provide a remedy. We are required to report certain information relating to certain customer complaints, warranty claims, field reports and notices and claims involving property damage, injuries and fatalities in the U.S. and claims involving fatalities outside the U.S. We are also required to report certain information concerning safety recalls and other safety campaigns outside the U.S.

Outside the U.S. safety standards and recall regulations often have the same purpose as the U.S. standards but may differ in their requirements and test procedures, adding complexity to regulatory compliance.

Automotive Financing - GM Financial GM Financial is our global captive automotive finance company and our global provider of automobile finance solutions. GM Financial conducts its business in North America, South America and through joint ventures in China.

GM Financial provides retail loan and lease lending across the credit spectrum. Additionally, GM Financial offers commercial lending products to dealers including new and used vehicle inventory floorplan financing and dealer loans, that are loans to finance improvements to dealership facilities, to provide working capital, and to purchase and/or finance dealership real estate. Other commercial lending products include financing for parts and accessories, dealer fleets and storage centers.

In North America, GM Financial offers a sub-prime lending program. The program is primarily offered to consumers with a FICO score or its equivalent of less than 620 who have limited access to automobile financing through banks and credit unions and is expected to sustain a higher level of credit losses than prime lending.

GM Financial generally seeks to fund its operations in each country through local sources to minimize currency and country risk. GM Financial primarily finances its loan, lease and commercial origination volume through the use of secured and unsecured credit facilities, through securitization transactions and through the issuance of unsecured debt in public markets.


8


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Employees At December 31, 2018 we employed 97,000 (56%) hourly employees and 76,000 (44%) salaried employees. At December 31, 2018 50,000 (49%) of our U.S. employees were represented by unions, a majority of which were represented by the International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace and Agriculture Implement Workers of America (UAW). The following table summarizes worldwide employment (in thousands):
 
December 31, 2018
GMNA(a)
124

GMI
39

GM Financial
10

Total Worldwide
173

 
 
U.S. - Salaried
53

U.S. - Hourly
50

__________
(a)
Includes GM Cruise

In November 2018 we announced our plan to transform our global workforce, which includes reducing our salaried staff in 2019 to ensure we have the right skill sets for today and the future, as well as 25% fewer executives to streamline decision making.

Executive Officers of the Registrant As of February 6, 2019 the names and ages of our executive officers and their positions with GM are as follows:
Name (Age)
 
Present GM Position (Effective Date)
 
Positions Held During the Past Five Years (Effective Date)
Mary T. Barra (57)
 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer (2016)
 
Chief Executive Officer and Member of the Board of Directors (2014)

Alan S. Batey (55)
 
Executive Vice President and President, North America (2014)
 
 
Alicia Boler-Davis (49)
 
Executive Vice President, Global Manufacturing (2016)
 
Senior Vice President, Global Connected Customer Experience (2014)
Vice President, Global Quality and U.S. Customer Experience (2012)
Barry L. Engle (55)
 
Executive Vice President and President, GM International (2018)
 
Executive Vice President and President, South America (2015)
Agility Fuel Systems, Chief Executive Officer (2011)
Craig B. Glidden (61)
 
Executive Vice President and General Counsel (2015)
 
LyondellBasell, Executive Vice President and Chief Legal Officer (2009)
Christopher T. Hatto (48)
 
Vice President, Controller and Chief Accounting Officer (2018)
 
Chief Financial Officer, U.S. Sales Operations (2016)
Chief Financial Officer, Customer Care and Aftersales (2013)
Mark L. Reuss (55)
 
President (2019)
 
Executive Vice President and President, Global Product Development Group and Cadillac (2018)
Executive Vice President, Global Product Development, Purchasing & Supply Chain (2014)

Dhivya Suryadevara (39)
 
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer (2018)
 
Vice President Corporate Finance (2017)
Vice President Finance and Treasurer (2015)
Chief Executive Officer, GM Asset Management (2013)
Matthew Tsien (58)
 
Executive Vice President and President, GM China (2014)
 
 

There are no family relationships between any of the officers named above and there is no arrangement or understanding between any of the officers named above and any other person pursuant to which he or she was selected as an officer. Each of the officers named above was elected by the Board of Directors to hold office until his or her successor is elected and qualified or until his or her earlier resignation or removal.

Website Access to Our Reports Our internet website address is www.gm.com. In addition to the information about us and our subsidiaries contained in this 2018 Form 10-K information about us can be found on our website including information on our corporate governance principles and practices. Our Investor Relations website at https://investor.gm.com contains a significant amount of information about us, including financial and other information for investors. We encourage investors to visit our website, as we frequently update and post new information about our company on our website and it is possible that this information could

9


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

be deemed to be material information. Our website and information included in or linked to our website are not part of this 2018 Form 10-K.

Our annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act) are available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after they are electronically filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).

*  *  *  *  *  *  *

Item 1A. Risk Factors

We have listed below the most significant risk factors applicable to us. These risk factors are not necessarily in the order of importance or probability of occurrence:

If we do not deliver new products, services and customer experiences in response to increased competition in the automotive industry, our business could suffer. We believe that the automotive industry will continue to experience significant change in the coming years. In addition to our traditional competitors, we must also be responsive to the entrance of non-traditional participants in the automotive industry. Industry participants are disrupting the historic business model of our industry through the introduction of new technologies, products, services, and methods of travel and vehicle ownership. It is strategically significant that we lead the technological disruption occurring in our industry, including consumer adoption of electric vehicles and commercialization of autonomous vehicles in a rideshare environment. To successfully execute our long-term strategy, we must continue to develop new products and services, including products and services that are outside of our historically core business, such as autonomous and electric vehicles, digital services and transportation as a service. The process of designing and developing new technology, products and services is complex, costly, and uncertain and requires extensive capital investment and the ability to retain and recruit talent. There can be no assurance that advances in technology will occur in a timely or feasible way, or that others will not acquire similar or superior technologies sooner than we do or that we will acquire technologies on an exclusive basis or at a significant price advantage. If we do not adequately prepare for and respond to new kinds of technological innovations, market developments and changing customer needs, our sales, profitability and long-term competitiveness may be harmed.

Our ability to maintain profitability is dependent upon our ability to timely fund and introduce new and improved vehicle models that are able to attract a sufficient number of consumers. We operate in a very competitive industry with market participants routinely introducing new and improved vehicle models and features designed to meet rapidly evolving consumer expectations. Producing new and improved vehicle models preserving our reputation for designing, building and selling safe, high-quality cars and trucks is critical to our long-term profitability. Successful launches of our new vehicles are critical to our short-term profitability. It generally takes two years or more to design and develop a new vehicle, and a number of factors may lengthen that time period. Because of this product development cycle and the various elements that may contribute to consumers?acceptance of new vehicle designs, including competitors?product introductions, technological innovations, fuel prices, general economic conditions and changes in quality, safety, reliability and styling demands and preferences, an initial product concept or design may not result in a vehicle that generates sales in sufficient quantities and at high enough prices to be profitable. Our high proportion of fixed costs, both due to our significant investment in property, plant and equipment as well as other requirements of our collective bargaining agreements, which limit our flexibility to adjust personnel costs to changes in demands for our products, may further exacerbate the risks associated with incorrectly assessing demand for our vehicles.

Our profitability is dependent upon the success of SUVs and full-size pick-up trucks. While we offer a balanced portfolio of cars, crossovers, SUVs and trucks, we generally recognize higher profit margins on our SUVs and trucks. Our success is dependent upon our ability to sell higher margin vehicles in sufficient volumes. Any shift in consumer preferences toward smaller, more fuel- efficient vehicles, whether as a result of increases in the price of oil or any sustained shortage of oil, including as a result of global political instability or other reasons, could weaken the demand for our higher margin vehicles.

We may continue to restructure our operations in the U.S. and various other countries and initiate additional cost reduction actions, but we may not succeed in doing so. Since 2017, we have undertaken restructuring actions to lower our operating costs in response to difficult market and operating conditions in various parts of the world, including the U.S., Korea and Europe. As we continue to assess our performance throughout our regions, we may take additional restructuring actions to rationalize our operations, which may result in asset write-downs or impairments and reduce our profitability in the periods incurred. In addition, we are continuing to implement a number of operating effectiveness initiatives to improve productivity and reduce costs. For example, in late 2018, we announced certain transformation actions to drive significant cost efficiencies and realign our current

10


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

manufacturing capacity and utilization in response to market-related volume declines in passenger cars. There is no guarantee that we will realize the anticipated savings or benefits from past or future restructuring and/or cost reduction actions in full or within the time periods we expect. In addition, these actions also subject us to increased risks of labor unrest or strikes, litigation, negative publicity and business disruption. Failure to realize anticipated savings or benefits from our restructuring and/or cost reduction actions could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition, liquidity, results of operations and cash flows.

Our electric vehicle strategy is dependent upon our ability to reduce the cost of manufacturing electric vehicles, as well as increased consumer adoption. We anticipate that the production and profitable sale of electric vehicles will become increasingly important to our business. Our inability to reduce the costs associated with the manufacture of battery-electric vehicles may negatively impact our earnings and financial condition. We currently benefit from certain government and economic incentives supporting the development of electric vehicles. The benefits from these incentives could be reduced, eliminated or exhausted, which may negatively affect our ability to sell electric vehicles at high enough prices to be profitable. In addition, our sale of electric vehicles is dependent upon consumer adoption, which could be impacted by numerous factors, including perceptions about electric vehicle features, quality, safety, performance and cost; perceptions about the limited range over which electric vehicles may be driven on a single battery charge; high fuel-economy internal combustion engine vehicles; volatility in the cost of fuel; government regulations and economic incentives; and access to charging facilities.

Our autonomous vehicle strategy is dependent upon our ability to successfully mitigate unique technological, operational, and regulatory risks. In recent years, we announced significant investments in autonomous vehicle technologies, including in GM Cruise Holdings LLC (GM Cruise Holdings), our subsidiary that is responsible for the development and commercialization of autonomous vehicle technology. Our autonomous vehicle operations are capital intensive and subject to a variety of risks inherent with the development of new technologies, including: our ability to continue to develop self-driving software and hardware, such as LiDAR sensors and other components; access to sufficient capital, including with respect to additional Softbank funding that is subject to regulatory approval; risks related to the manufacture of purpose-built autonomous vehicles; and significant competition from both established automotive companies and technology companies, some of which may have more resources and capital to devote to autonomous vehicle technologies than we do. In addition, we face risks related to the commercial deployment of autonomous vehicles on our targeted timeline or at all, including consumer acceptance, achievement of adequate safety and other performance standards and compliance with uncertain, evolving and potentially conflicting federal and state regulations. To the extent accidents, cybersecurity breaches or other adverse events associated with our autonomous driving systems occur, we could be subject to liability, government scrutiny and further regulation. Any of the foregoing could materially and adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition and growth prospects.

Our business is highly dependent upon global automobile market sales volume, which can be volatile. Because we have a high proportion of relatively fixed structural costs, small changes in sales volume can have a disproportionately large effect on our profitability. A number of economic and market conditions drive changes in vehicle sales, including real estate values, the availability and prices of used vehicles, levels of unemployment, availability of affordable financing, fluctuations in the cost of fuel, consumer confidence, political unrest and global economic conditions. For a discussion of economic and market trends, see the Overview section of the MD&A. We cannot predict future economic and market conditions with certainty.

11


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


Our significant business in China subjects us to unique operational, competitive and regulatory risks. Maintaining a strong position in the Chinese market is a key component of our global growth strategy. Our business in China is subject to aggressive competition from many of the largest global manufacturers and numerous domestic manufacturers as well as non-traditional market participants, such as domestic technology companies. In addition, our success in China depends upon our ability to adequately address unique market and consumer preferences driven by advancements related to infotainment and other new technologies. Increased competition, increased U.S.-China trade restrictions and weakening economic conditions in China, among other things, may result in price reductions, reduced sales, profitability, and margins, and challenges to gain or hold market share. In addition to increased competition, Chinese regulators have announced aggressive "green" policy initiatives and quotas for the sale of electric vehicles, which have challenging lead times.

Certain risks and uncertainties of doing business in China are solely within the control of the Chinese government, and Chinese law regulates the scope of our foreign investments and business conducted within China. In order to maintain access to the Chinese market, we may be required to comply with significant technical and other regulatory requirements that are unique to the Chinese market, at times with challenging lead times to implement such requirements. These actions may increase the cost of doing business in China and reduce our profitability. In particular, the announced intention of several Chinese cities to implement new China 6 emissions regulations in July 2019 represents a risk for the sales of our Chinese joint ventures.

A significant amount of our operations are conducted by joint ventures that we cannot operate solely for our benefit. Many of our operations, primarily in China and Korea, are carried out by joint ventures. In joint ventures we share ownership and management of a company with one or more parties who may not have the same goals, strategies, priorities or resources as we do and may compete with us outside the joint venture. Joint ventures are intended to be operated for the equal benefit of all co-owners, rather than for our exclusive benefit. Operating a business as a joint venture often requires additional organizational formalities as well as time-consuming procedures for sharing information and making decisions that must further take into consideration our partners' interests. In joint ventures we are required to foster our relationships with our co-owners as well as promote the overall success of the joint venture, and if a co-owner changes, relationships deteriorate or strategic objectives diverge, our success in the joint venture may be materially adversely affected. The benefits from a successful joint venture are shared among the co-owners, therefore we do not receive all the benefits from our successful joint ventures. In addition, because we share ownership and management with one or more parties, we may have limited control over the actions of a joint venture, particularly when we own a minority interest. As a result, we may be unable to prevent misconduct or other violations of applicable laws by a joint venture. Moreover, a joint venture may not follow the same requirements regarding compliance, internal controls and internal control over financial reporting that we follow. To the extent another party makes decisions that negatively impact the joint venture or internal control issues arise within the joint venture, we may have to take responsive or other actions or we may be subject to penalties, fines or other related actions for these activities.

The international scale and footprint of our operations exposes us to additional risks. We manufacture, sell and service products globally and rely upon a global supply chain to deliver the raw materials, components, systems and parts that we need to manufacture our products. Our global operations subject us to extensive domestic and foreign legal and regulatory requirements, and a variety of other political, economic and regulatory risks including: (1) changes in government leadership; (2) changes in labor, tax and other laws, regulations or government policies impacting our overall business model or practices or restricting our ability to manufacture, purchase or sell products consistent with market demand and our business objectives; (3) political pressures to change any aspect of our business model or practices or that impair our ability to source raw materials, services, components, systems and parts, or manufacture products on competitive terms in a manner consistent with our business objectives; (4) political instability or government controls over certain sectors; (5) political and economic tensions between governments and changes in international trade policies, including restrictions on the repatriation of dividends, especially between China and the U.S.; (6) more detailed inspections, new or higher tariffs, for example, on products imported into or exported from the U.S.; (7) new barriers to entry or domestic preference procurement requirements, including changes to, withdrawals from or impediments to implementing free trade agreements (for example, the North American Free Trade Agreement or its successor), or preferences of foreign nationals for domestically manufactured products; (8) changes in foreign currency exchange rates, particularly in Brazil and Argentina, and interest rates; (9) economic downturns in foreign countries or geographic regions where we have significant operations, or significant changes in conditions in the countries in which we operate; (10) differing local product preferences and product requirements, including government certification requirements related to, among other things, fuel economy, vehicle emissions and safety; (11) impact of compliance with U.S. and other foreign countries?export controls and economic sanctions; (12) liabilities resulting from U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, those related to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and certain other anti-corruption laws; (13) differing labor regulations, requirements and union relationships; (14) differing dealer and franchise regulations and relationships; and (15) difficulties in obtaining financing in foreign countries for local operations.


12


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Any significant disruption at one of our manufacturing facilities could disrupt our production schedule. We assemble vehicles at various facilities around the world. Our facilities are typically designed to produce particular models for particular geographic markets. No single facility is designed to manufacture our full range of vehicles. In some cases, certain facilities produce products, systems, components and parts that disproportionately contribute a greater degree to our profitability than others. Should these or other facilities become unavailable either temporarily or permanently for any number of reasons, including labor disruptions or catastrophic weather events, the inability to manufacture at the affected facility may result in harm to our reputation, increased costs, lower revenues and the loss of customers. We may not be able to easily shift production to other facilities or to make up for lost production. Any new facility needed to replace an inoperable manufacturing facility would need to comply with the necessary regulatory requirements, need to satisfy our specialized manufacturing requirements and require specialized equipment. 

In 2019, our collective bargaining agreement with the United Automobile Workers will expire, and we will negotiate a new agreement. In addition, in late 2018 we announced certain restructuring actions, which included among other things, a reduction in our workforce and the unallocation of products to certain manufacturing facilities in North America. As a result, we may be subject to an increased risk of strikes, work stoppages or other types of conflicts with labor unions and employees.

Any disruption in our suppliers' operations could disrupt our production schedule. Our automotive operations are dependent upon the continued ability of our suppliers to deliver the systems, components, raw materials and parts that we need to manufacture our products. Our use of 搄ust-in-time?manufacturing processes allows us to maintain minimal inventory. As a result, our ability to maintain production is dependent upon our suppliers delivering sufficient quantities of systems, components, raw materials and parts on time to meet our production schedules. In some instances, we purchase systems, components, raw materials and parts that are ultimately derived from a single source and may be at an increased risk for supply disruptions. Any number of factors, including labor disruptions, catastrophic weather events, contractual or other disputes with suppliers, and supplier financial difficulties or solvency problems could disrupt our suppliers' operations and lead to uncertainty in our supply chain or cause supply disruptions for us which could, in turn, disrupt our operations, including the production of certain of our higher margin vehicles. If we experience supply disruptions, we may not be able to develop alternate sourcing quickly. Any disruption of our production schedule caused by an unexpected shortage of systems, components, raw materials or parts even for a relatively short period of time could cause us to alter production schedules or suspend production entirely.

High prices of raw materials or other inputs used by us and our suppliers could negatively impact our profitability. Increases in prices for raw materials or other inputs that we and our suppliers use in manufacturing products, systems, components and parts, such as steel, precious metals, or non-ferrous metals, including aluminum, copper and plastic, may lead to higher production costs for parts, components and vehicles. Changes in trade policies and tariffs, fluctuations in supply and demand, and other economic and political factors may continue to create pricing pressure for raw materials and other inputs. This could, in turn, negatively impact our future profitability because we may not be able to pass all of those costs on to our customers or require our suppliers to absorb such costs.

We operate in a highly competitive industry that has excess manufacturing capacity and attempts by our competitors to sell more vehicles could have a significant negative effect on our vehicle pricing, market share and operating results. The global automotive industry is highly competitive and overall manufacturing capacity in the industry far exceeds demand. Many manufacturers have relatively high fixed labor costs as well as significant limitations on their ability to close facilities and reduce fixed costs. Many of our competitors have responded to these relatively high fixed costs by providing subsidized financing or leasing programs, offering marketing incentives or reducing vehicle prices. As a result, we are not necessarily able to set our prices to offset higher costs of marketing incentives, commodity or other cost increases, or the impact of adverse currency fluctuations. Our competitors may also seek to benefit from economies of scale by consolidating or entering into other strategic agreements such as alliances intended to enhance their competitiveness.

Domestic manufacturers in lower cost countries, such as China and India, have become competitors in key emerging markets and announced their intention to export their products to established markets as a low-cost alternative to established entry-level automobiles. In addition, foreign governments may decide to implement tax and other policies that favor their domestic manufacturers at the expense of international manufacturers, including GM and its joint venture partners. These actions have had, and are expected to continue to have, a significant negative effect on our vehicle pricing, market share and operating results.

Competitors may independently develop products and services similar to ours, and there are no guarantees that GM's intellectual property rights would prevent competitors from independently developing or selling those products and services. There may be instances where, notwithstanding our intellectual property position, competitive products or services may impact the value of our brands and other intangible assets, and our business may be adversely affected. Moreover, although GM takes reasonable steps to maintain the confidentiality of GM proprietary information, there can be no assurance that such efforts will

13


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

completely deter misappropriation or improper use of our technology. We sometimes face attempts to gain unauthorized access to our information technology networks and systems for the purpose of improperly acquiring our trade secrets or confidential business information. The theft or unauthorized use or publication of our trade secrets and other confidential business information as a result of such an incident could adversely affect our competitive position. In addition, we may be the target of enforcement of patents by third parties, including aggressive and opportunistic enforcement claims by non-practicing entities. Regardless of the merit of such claims, responding to infringement claims can be expensive and time-consuming. Although we have taken steps to mitigate such risks, if we are found to infringe any third-party rights, we could be required to pay substantial damages or we could be enjoined from offering some of our products and services.

Security breaches and other disruptions to information technology systems and networked products, including connected vehicles, owned or maintained by us, GM Financial, or third-party vendors or suppliers on our behalf, could interfere with our operations and could compromise the confidentiality of private customer data or our proprietary information.  We rely upon information technology systems and manufacture networked products, some of which are managed by third-parties, to process, transmit and store electronic information, and to manage or support a variety of our business processes, activities and products. Additionally, we and GM Financial collect and store sensitive data, including intellectual property, proprietary business information, proprietary business information of our dealers and suppliers, as well as personally identifiable information of our customers and employees, in data centers and on information technology networks. The secure operation of these systems and products, and the processing and maintenance of the information processed by these systems and products, is critical to our business operations and strategy. Despite security measures and business continuity plans, these systems and products may be vulnerable to damage, disruptions or shutdowns caused by attacks by hackers, computer viruses, or breaches due to errors or malfeasance by employees, contractors and others who have access to these systems and products. The occurrence of any of these events could compromise the operational integrity of these systems and products. Similarly, such an occurrence could result in the compromise or loss of the information processed by these systems and products. Such events could result in, among other things, the loss of proprietary data, interruptions or delays in our business operations and damage to our reputation. In addition, such events could result in legal claims or proceedings, liability or regulatory penalties under laws protecting the privacy of personal information; disrupt operations; or reduce the competitive advantage we hope to derive from our investment in advanced technologies. We have experienced such events in the past and, although past events were immaterial, future events may occur and may be material.

Portions of our information technology systems also may experience interruptions, delays or cessations of service or produce errors due to regular maintenance efforts, such as systems integration or migration work that takes place from time to time. We may not be successful in implementing new systems and transitioning data, which could cause business disruptions and be more expensive, time-consuming, disruptive and resource intensive. Such disruptions could adversely impact our ability to design, manufacture and sell products and services, and interrupt other business processes.

Security breaches and other disruptions of our in-vehicle systems could impact the safety of our customers and reduce confidence in GM and our products. Our vehicles contain complex information technology systems. These systems control various vehicle functions including engine, transmission, safety, steering, navigation, acceleration, braking, window and door lock functions. We have designed, implemented and tested security measures intended to prevent unauthorized access to these systems. However, hackers have reportedly attempted, and may attempt in the future, to gain unauthorized access to modify, alter and use such systems to gain control of, or to change, our vehicles?functionality, user interface and performance characteristics, or to gain access to data stored in or generated by the vehicle. Any unauthorized access to or control of our vehicles or their systems or any loss of data could impact the safety of our customers or result in legal claims or proceedings, liability or regulatory penalties. In addition, regardless of their veracity, reports of unauthorized access to our vehicles, their systems or data could negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.

Our enterprise data practices, including the collection, use, sharing, and security of the Personal Identifiable Information of our customers, employees, or suppliers are subject to increasingly complex, restrictive, and punitive regulations in all key market regions. Under these regulations, the failure to maintain compliant data practices could result in consumer complaints and regulatory inquiry, resulting in civil or criminal penalties, as well as brand impact or other harm to our business. In addition, increased consumer sensitivity to real or perceived failures in maintaining acceptable data practices could damage our reputation and deter current and potential users or customers from using our products and services. Because many of these laws are new, there is little clarity as to their interpretation, as well as a lack of precedent for the scope of enforcement. The cost of compliance with these laws and regulations will be high and is likely to increase in the future. For example, in Europe, the General Data Protection Regulation came into effect on May 25, 2018, and applies to all our ongoing operations in the EU. This regulation significantly increases the potential financial penalties for noncompliance, including possible fines of up to 4% of global annual turnover. Similar regulations are coming into effect in Brazil, China, and California.


14


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Our operations and products are subject to extensive laws, governmental regulations and policies that can significantly increase our costs and affect how we do business. We are significantly affected by governmental regulations that can increase costs related to the production of our vehicles and affect our product portfolio, particularly regulations relating to emissions and fuel economy standards. Meeting or exceeding many of these regulations is costly and often technologically challenging, especially when standards may not be harmonized across jurisdictions. We anticipate that the number and extent of these and other regulations, laws and policies, and the related costs and changes to our product portfolio, may increase significantly in the future, primarily out of concern for the environment (including concerns about global climate change and its impact). These government regulatory requirements could significantly affect our plans for global product development and given the uncertainty surrounding enforcement and regulatory definitions and interpretations, may result in substantial costs, including civil or criminal penalties. In addition, an evolving but un-harmonized regulatory framework may limit or dictate the types of vehicles we sell and where we sell them, which can affect revenue. Refer to the "Environmental and Regulatory Matters" section of Item 1. Business for further information on these requirements. We also expect that manufacturers will continue to be subject to increased scrutiny from regulators globally.

We expect that to comply with current or even revised fuel economy and emission control requirements we will be required to sell a significant volume of electric vehicles, as well as develop and implement new technologies for conventional internal combustion engines, all at increased cost levels. There are limits on our ability to achieve fuel economy improvements over a given time frame, however. There is no assurance that we will be able to produce and sell vehicles that use such new technologies on a profitable basis or that our customers will purchase such vehicles in the quantities necessary for us to comply with these regulatory programs.

In the current uncertain regulatory framework, environmental liabilities for which we may be responsible and that are not reasonably estimable could be substantial. Alleged violations of safety, fuel economy or emissions standards could result in legal proceedings, the recall of one or more of our products, negotiated remedial actions, fines, restricted product offerings or a combination of any of those items. Any of these actions could have substantial adverse effects on our operations including facility idling, reduced employment, increased costs and loss of revenue.

Many of our advanced technologies, including autonomous vehicles, present novel issues with which domestic and foreign regulators have only limited experience and will be subject to evolving regulatory frameworks. Any current or future regulations in these areas could impact whether and how these technologies are designed and integrated into our products, and may ultimately subject us to increased costs and uncertainty.

We could be materially adversely affected by unusual or significant litigation, governmental investigations or other proceedings.  We are subject to legal proceedings involving various issues, including product liability lawsuits, class action litigations alleging product defects, emissions litigation (both in the U.S. and elsewhere), stockholder litigation, labor litigation in various countries (including Korea and Brazil) and proceedings related to the Ignition Switch Recall. In addition, we are subject to governmental proceedings and investigations. A negative outcome in one or more of these legal proceedings could result in the imposition of damages, including punitive damages, substantial fines, significant reputational harm, civil lawsuits and criminal penalties, interruptions of business, modification of business practices, equitable remedies and other sanctions against us or our personnel as well as significant legal and other costs. In addition, we may become obligated to issue additional shares (Adjustment Shares) of up to 30 million shares of our common stock (subject to adjustment to take into account stock dividends, stock splits and other transactions) to the Motors Liquidation Company (MLC) GUC Trust (GUC Trust) under a provision of the Amended and Restated Master Sale and Purchase Agreement between us and General Motors Corporation and certain of its subsidiaries in the event that allowed general unsecured claims against the GUC Trust, as estimated by the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York (Bankruptcy Court), exceed $35.0 billion. The GUC Trust stated in public filings that allowed general unsecured claims were approximately $31.9 billion as of December 31, 2018. For a further discussion of these matters refer to Note 16 to our consolidated financial statements.

The costs and effect on our reputation of product safety recalls and alleged defects in products and services could materially adversely affect our business.  Government safety standards require manufacturers to remedy certain product safety defects through recall campaigns. Under these standards, we could be subject to civil or criminal penalties or may incur various costs, including significant costs for free repairs. At present, the costs we incur in connection with these recalls typically include the cost of the part being replaced and labor to remove and replace the defective part. The costs to complete a recall could be exacerbated to the extent that such action relates to a global platform. Concerns about the safety of our products, including advanced technologies like autonomous, whether raised internally or by regulators or consumer advocates, and whether or not based on scientific evidence or supported by data, can result in product delays, recalls, lost sales, governmental investigations, regulatory action, private claims, lawsuits and settlements, and reputational damage. These circumstances can also result in damage to brand image, brand equity and consumer trust in the Company抯 products and ability to lead the disruption occurring in the automotive industry.

15


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES


We currently source a variety of systems, components, raw materials and parts from third parties. From time to time these items may have performance or quality issues that could harm our reputation and cause us to incur significant costs.

We may incur additional tax expense or become subject to additional tax exposure. We are subject to the tax laws and regulations of the U.S. and numerous other jurisdictions in which we do business. Many judgments are required in determining our worldwide provision for income taxes and other tax liabilities, and we are regularly under audit by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities, which may not agree with our tax positions. In addition, our tax liabilities are subject to other significant risks and uncertainties, including those arising from potential changes in laws and/or regulations in the countries in which we do business, the possibility of adverse determinations with respect to the application of existing laws, and changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities. Any unfavorable resolution of these and other uncertainties may have a significant adverse impact on our tax rate. For example, the impact of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the Tax Act), which was enacted on December 22, 2017, may differ from the Company抯 previously recorded amounts, possibly materially, due to potential changes in the Tax Act (including with respect to the regulations promulgated thereunder) or changes to its interpretation. If our tax expense were to increase, or if the ultimate determination of our taxes owed is for an amount in excess of amounts previously accrued, our operating results, cash flows and financial condition could be adversely affected.

We rely on GM Financial to provide financial services to our customers and dealers in North America, South America and Asia/Pacific. GM Financial faces a number of business, economic and financial risks that could impair its access to capital and negatively affect its business and operations, which in turn impede its ability to provide leasing and financing to customers and commercial lending to our dealers. Any reduction in GM Financial's ability to provide such financial services would negatively affect our efforts to support additional sales of our vehicles and expand our market penetration among customers and dealers.

The primary factors that could adversely affect GM Financial's business and operations and reduce its ability to provide financing services at competitive rates include the sufficiency, availability and cost of sources of financing, including credit facilities, securitization programs and secured and unsecured debt issuances; the performance of loans and leases in its portfolio, which could be materially affected by charge-offs, delinquencies and prepayments; wholesale auction values of used vehicles; higher than expected vehicle return rates and the residual value performance on vehicles GM Financial leases to customers; fluctuations in interest rates and currencies; and changes to regulation, supervision, enforcement and licensing across various jurisdictions.

Further, as an entity operating in the financial services sector, GM Financial is required to comply with a wide variety of laws and regulations that may be costly to adhere to and may affect our consolidated operating results. Compliance with these laws and regulations requires that GM Financial maintain forms, processes, procedures, controls and the infrastructure to support these requirements and these laws and regulations often create operational constraints both on GM Financial抯 ability to implement servicing procedures and on pricing. Laws in the financial services industry are designed primarily for the protection of consumers. The failure to comply with these laws could result in significant statutory civil and criminal penalties, monetary damages, attorneys?fees and costs, possible revocation of licenses and damage to reputation, brand and valued customer relationships.

Our defined benefit pension plans are currently underfunded and our pension funding requirements could increase significantly due to a reduction in funded status as a result of a variety of factors, including weak performance of financial markets, declining interest rates, changes in laws or regulations, changes in assumptions or investments that do not achieve adequate returns. Our employee benefit plans currently hold a significant amount of equity and fixed income securities. A detailed description of the investment funds and strategies and our potential funding requirements are disclosed in Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements, which also describes significant concentrations of risk to the plan investments.

Our future funding requirements for our U.S. defined benefit pension plans depend upon the future performance of assets placed in trusts for these plans, the level of interest rates used to determine funding levels, the level of benefits provided for by the plans and any changes in laws and regulations. Future funding requirements generally increase if the discount rate decreases or if actual asset returns are lower than expected asset returns, assuming other factors are held constant. We estimate future contributions to these plans using assumptions with respect to these and other items. Changes to those assumptions could have a significant effect on future contributions.

There are additional risks due to the complexity and magnitude of our investments. Examples include implementation of significant changes in investment policy, insufficient market liquidity in particular asset classes and the inability to quickly rebalance illiquid and long-term investments.


16


Table of Contents
GENERAL MOTORS COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES

Factors which affect future funding requirements for our U.S. defined benefit plans generally affect the required funding for non-U.S. plans. Certain plans outside the U.S. do not have assets and therefore the obligation is funded as benefits are paid. If local legal authorities increase the minimum funding requirements for our non-U.S. plans, we could be required to contribute more funds.


Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments

None
Tesla, Inc. (0001318605)
ITEM 1.	BUSINESS
 
Overview
We design, develop, manufacture and sell high-performance fully electric vehicles (揈Vs? and energy generation and storage systems, and also install and maintain such energy systems and sell solar electricity. We are the world抯 first vertically integrated sustainable energy company, offering end-to-end clean energy products, including generation, storage and consumption. We have established and continue to grow a global network of stores, galleries, vehicle service centers, Mobile Service technicians, body shops, Supercharger stations and Destination Chargers to accelerate the widespread adoption of our products, and we continue to develop self-driving capability in order to improve vehicle safety. Our sustainable energy products, engineering expertise, intense focus to accelerate the world抯 transition to sustainable energy, and business model differentiate us from other companies. 
We currently produce and sell three fully electric vehicles: the Model S sedan, the Model X sport utility vehicle (揝UV? and the Model 3 sedan. All of our vehicles offer high performance and functionality as well as attractive styling. 
We commenced deliveries of Model S in June 2012 and have continued to improve Model S by introducing performance, all-wheel drive dual motor, and Autopilot options, as well as free over-the-air software updates. We commenced deliveries of Model X in September 2015. Model X offers seating for up to seven people, all-wheel drive, and our Autopilot functionality. We commenced deliveries of Model 3, a lower-priced sedan designed for the mass market, in July 2017, and we have significantly ramped its production. We are now embarking on the delivery of Model 3 in international markets and are focusing on lowering manufacturing costs while continuing to increase its production rate.
We also intend to bring additional all-electric vehicles to market in the future, including Model Y, the Tesla Semi truck, a pickup truck and a new version of the Tesla Roadster. The production of fully electric vehicles that meet consumers?range and performance expectations requires substantial design, engineering, and integration work on almost every system of our vehicles. Our design and vehicle engineering capabilities, combined with the technical advancements of our powertrain system, have enabled us to design and develop electric vehicles that we believe overcome the design, styling, and performance issues that have historically limited broad adoption of electric vehicles. As a result, our customers enjoy several benefits, including:
 	?Long Range and Recharging Flexibility. Our vehicles offer ranges that significantly exceed those of any other commercially available electric vehicle. In addition, our vehicles incorporate our proprietary on-board charging system, permitting recharging from almost any available electrical outlet, and also offer fast charging capability from our proprietary Supercharger network.
 	?High-Performance Without Compromised Design or Functionality. Our vehicles deliver instantaneous and sustained acceleration, an advanced Autopilot system with active safety and convenience features, and over-the-air software updates.
 	?Energy Efficiency and Cost of Ownership. Our vehicles offer an attractive cost of ownership compared to internal combustion engine or hybrid electric vehicles. Using only an electric powertrain enables us to create more energy-efficient vehicles that are mechanically simpler than currently available hybrid or internal combustion engine vehicles. The cost to charge our vehicles is less compared to fueling internal combustion vehicles. We also expect our electric vehicles will have lower relative maintenance costs than other vehicles due to fewer moving parts and the absence of certain components, including oil, oil filters, spark plugs and engine valves.
We sell our vehicles through our own sales and service network which we are continuing to grow globally. The benefits we receive from distribution ownership enable us to improve the overall customer experience, the speed of product development and the capital efficiency of our business. We are also continuing to build our network of Superchargers and Destination Chargers in North America, Europe and Asia to provide alternative convenient options for fast charging.
1
________________________________________
 
In addition, we are leveraging our technological expertise in batteries, power electronics, and integrated systems to manufacture and sell energy storage products. In late 2016, we began production and deliveries of our latest generation energy storage products, Powerwall 2 and Powerpack 2. Powerwall 2 is a 14 kilowatt hour (搆Wh? home battery with an integrated inverter. Powerpack 2 is an infinitely scalable energy storage system for commercial, industrial and utility applications, comprised of up to 210 kWh (AC) battery packs and up to 650 kVa (at 480V) inverters. Similar to our electric vehicles, our energy storage products have been developed to receive over-the-air firmware and software updates that enable additional features over time.
Finally, we sell and lease solar energy systems (with or without accompanying energy storage systems) to residential and commercial customers and sell renewable energy to residential and commercial customers at prices that are typically below utility rates. Since 2006, we have installed solar energy systems for hundreds of thousands of customers. However, the electricity produced by our solar installations represents a very small fraction of total U.S. electricity generation. With tens of millions of single-family homes and businesses in our primary service territories, and many more in other locations, we have a large opportunity to expand and grow this business. We believe that residential solar energy generation is gaining momentum, as exemplified in part by the state of California recently requiring that new homes be built with solar generation starting in 2020. We also intend to ramp production of our innovative Solar Roof product.
We manufacture our vehicle products primarily at our facilities in Fremont, California, Lathrop, California, Tilburg, Netherlands and at our Gigafactory 1 near Reno, Nevada. We manufacture our energy storage products at Gigafactory 1 and Tesla solar products at our U.S. facilities including in Buffalo, New York (Gigafactory 2). In January 2019, we began construction of our Gigafactory Shanghai in China, where we intend to commence production of certain trims of Model 3 for the local market by the end of 2019.
Our Products and Services
Vehicles
Model S
Model S is a fully electric, four-door, five-adult passenger sedan that offers compelling range and high performance and our all-wheel drive dual motor system, which we also offer in a performance version. Model S 100D is the longest range all-electric production sedan in the world, and the performance version with the Ludicrous speed upgrade is the quickest accelerating production vehicle available.
Model S introduced a 17 inch touch screen driver interface, our advanced Autopilot hardware to enable both active safety and convenience features, and over-the-air software updates. We believe the combination of performance, safety, styling, convenience and energy efficiency of Model S positions it as a compelling alternative to other vehicles in the luxury and performance segments.
Model X
Model X is the longest range all-electric production sport utility vehicle in the world, and offers high performance features such as our fully electric, all-wheel drive dual motor system and our Autopilot system. Model X can seat up to seven adults and incorporates a unique falcon wing door system for easy access to the second and third seating rows. Model X is sold in all markets where Model S is available.
Model 3
Model 3 is our third generation electric vehicle, which we began delivering in July 2017. Model 3 and its drive units are currently produced at high volumes at the Tesla Factory in Fremont, California and at Gigafactory 1, respectively, and we intend to begin production of certain vehicle trims for China at our Gigafactory Shanghai by the end of 2019. We have offered a number of variants of Model 3, including performance, dual motor, single motor, long-range and medium-range, and intend to offer in the future a variant of Model 3 at a starting price of $35,000. We are now embarking on the delivery of Model 3 in international markets and are focusing on lowering manufacturing costs while continuing to increase its production rate.
2
________________________________________
 
Future Consumer and Commercial EVs 
In addition to our volume-produced consumer EVs, including future vehicles such as Model Y and a pickup truck, we are planning to introduce additional types of vehicles to address a broader cross-section of the vehicle market, including commercial EVs such as the Tesla Semi truck, and a new version of the Tesla Roadster. We have started to accept reservations for the Tesla Semi truck and the new Tesla Roadster.
Energy Storage
Using the energy management technologies and manufacturing processes developed for our vehicle powertrain systems, we developed energy storage products for use in homes, commercial facilities and on the utility grid. Advances in battery architecture, thermal management and power electronics that were originally commercialized in our vehicles are now being leveraged in our energy storage products. Our energy storage systems are used for numerous applications including backup power, grid independence, peak demand reduction, demand response, reducing intermittency of renewable generation, replacement of fossil fuel generation and wholesale electric market services. 
Our energy product portfolio includes systems with a wide range of applications, from residential to large grid-scale projects. Powerwall 2 is a 14 kWh rechargeable lithium-ion battery designed to store energy at a home or small commercial facility and can be used to provide seamless backup power in a grid outage and to maximize self-consumption of solar power generation. In addition, we offer the Powerpack 2 system, a fully integrated energy storage solution comprised of up to 210kWh (AC) battery packs and up to 650 kVa (at 480V) inverters that can be grouped together to form megawatt hour (揗Wh? and gigawatt hour (揋Wh? sized installations. The Powerpack 2 system can be used by commercial and industrial customers for peak shaving, load shifting, self-consumption of solar generation and demand response, as well as to provide backup power during grid outages, and by utilities and independent power producers to smooth and firm the output of renewable power generation sources, provide dynamic energy capacity to the grid, defer or eliminate the need to upgrade transmission or distribution infrastructure, and provide a variety of other grid services such as frequency regulation and voltage control. Powerpack 2 can also be combined with renewable energy generation sources to create microgrids that provide communities with clean, resilient and affordable power.
Along with designing and manufacturing energy storage products, we continue to develop and advance our software capabilities for the control and optimal dispatch of energy storage systems across a wide range of markets and applications.
Solar Energy Systems
The major components of our solar energy systems include solar panels that convert sunlight into electrical current, inverters that convert the electrical output from the panels to a usable current compatible with the electric grid, racking that attaches the solar panels to the roof or ground, electrical hardware that connects the solar energy system to the electric grid, and our monitoring device. While we have recently started manufacturing solar panels at Gigafactory 2 in collaboration with Panasonic, we currently purchase the majority of system components from vendors, maintaining multiple sources for each major component to ensure competitive pricing and an adequate supply of materials. We also design and manufacture other system components.
The residential solar energy systems that we sell enable our customers to take direct advantage of federal tax credits to reduce their electricity costs. Our solar loan offering enables customers to own their solar energy systems with little upfront cost. We also continue to offer lease and power purchase agreement (揚PA? options to both residential and commercial customers. Our current standard leases and PPAs have a 20-year term, and we typically offer customers the opportunity to renew their agreements.
In October 2016, we unveiled Solar Roof, which integrates solar energy production with aesthetically pleasing and durable glass roofing tiles and is designed to complement the architecture of homes and commercial buildings while turning sunlight into electricity. We have been installing this product at a slow pace to gather learnings about our design and installation processes, and plan to ramp the production of Solar Roof with significantly improved manufacturing capabilities during 2019.
3
________________________________________
 
Technology
Vehicles
Our core competencies are powertrain engineering, vehicle engineering, innovative manufacturing and energy storage. Our core intellectual property includes our electric powertrain, our ability to design vehicles that utilize the unique advantages of an electric powertrain and our development of self-driving technologies. Our powertrain consists of our battery pack, power electronics, motor, gearbox and control software. We offer several powertrain variants for our vehicles that incorporate years of research and development. In addition, we have designed our vehicles to incorporate the latest advances in consumer technologies, such as mobile computing, sensing, displays, and connectivity. 
Battery Pack
We design our battery packs to achieve high energy density at a low cost while also maintaining safety, reliability and long life. Our proprietary technology includes systems for high density energy storage, cooling, safety, charge balancing, structural durability, and electronics management. We have also pioneered advanced manufacturing techniques to manufacture large volumes of battery packs with high quality at low cost.
We have significant expertise in the safety and management systems needed to use lithium-ion cells in the automotive environment, and have further optimized cell designs to increase overall performance. These advancements have enabled us to improve over time the cost and performance of our batteries. 
Our engineering and manufacturing efforts have been performed with a longer-term goal of building a foundation for further development. For instance, we have designed our battery pack to permit flexibility with respect to battery cell chemistry and form factor. We maintain extensive testing and R&D capabilities at the individual cell level, the full battery-pack level and on other critical battery pack systems, and have built an expansive body of knowledge on lithium-ion cell vendors, chemistry types, and performance characteristics. We believe that the flexibility of our designs, combined with our research and real-world performance data, will enable us to continue to evaluate new battery cells and optimize battery pack system performance and cost for our current and future vehicles.
Power Electronics
The power electronics in our electric vehicle powertrain govern the flow of high voltage electrical current throughout our vehicles and serve to power our electric motor to generate torque while driving and deliver energy into the battery pack while charging.
The drive inverter converts direct current from the battery pack into alternating current to drive our induction and permanent magnet motors and provides 搑egenerative braking?functionality, which captures energy from the wheels to charge the battery pack. The primary technological advantages to our designs include the ability to drive large amounts of current in a small physical package with high efficiency and low cost.
The charger charges the battery pack by converting alternating current (usually from a wall outlet or other electricity source) into direct current that can be accepted by the battery. Tesla vehicles can recharge on a wide variety of electricity sources due to the design of this charger, from a common household outlet to high power circuits meant for more industrial uses. 
Dual Motor Powertrain
We offer dual motor powertrain vehicles, which use two electric motors to maximize traction and performance in an all-wheel drive configuration. Tesla抯 dual motor powertrain digitally and independently controls torque to the front and rear wheels. The near-instantaneous response of the motors, combined with low centers of gravity, provides drivers with controlled performance and increased traction control.
4
________________________________________
 
Vehicle Control and Infotainment Software
The performance and safety systems of our vehicles and their battery packs require sophisticated control software. There are numerous processors in our vehicles to control these functions, and we write custom firmware for many of these processors. Software algorithms control traction, vehicle stability, the acceleration and regenerative braking of the vehicle, climate control and thermal management, and are also used extensively to monitor the charge state of the battery pack and to manage all of its safety systems. Drivers use the information and control systems in our vehicles to optimize performance, customize vehicle behavior, manage charging modes and times and control all infotainment functions. We develop almost all of this software, including most of the user interfaces, internally.
Self-Driving Development
We have expertise in developing self-driving systems, and currently offer in our vehicles an advanced driver assist system that we refer to as Autopilot, including auto-steering, traffic aware cruise control, automated lane changing, automated parking, Summon and driver warning systems. In October 2016, we began equipping all Tesla vehicles with hardware needed for full self-driving capability, including cameras that provide 360 degree visibility, updated ultrasonic sensors for object detection, a forward-facing radar with enhanced processing, and a powerful new onboard computer. Our Autopilot systems relieve our drivers of the most tedious and potentially dangerous aspects of road travel. Although, at present, the driver is ultimately responsible for controlling the vehicle, our system provides safety and convenience functionality that allows our customers to rely on it much like the system that airplane pilots use when conditions permit. This hardware suite, along with over-the-air firmware updates and field data feedback loops from the onboard camera, radar, ultrasonics, and GPS, enables the system to continually learn and improve its performance.
Additionally, we continue to make significant advancements in the development of fully self-driving technologies.
Energy Storage
We are leveraging many of the component-level technologies from our vehicles to advance our energy storage products, including high density energy storage, cooling, safety, charge balancing, structural durability, and electronics management. By taking a modular approach to the design of battery systems, we are able to maximize manufacturing capacity to produce both Powerwall and Powerpack products. Additionally, we are making significant strides in the area of bi-directional, grid-tied power electronics that enable us to interconnect our battery systems seamlessly with global electricity grids while providing fast-acting systems for power injection and absorption.
Solar Energy Systems
We are continually innovating and developing new technologies to facilitate the growth of our solar energy systems business. For example, Solar Roof is being designed to work seamlessly with Tesla Powerwall 2 and we have developed proprietary software to reduce system design and installation timelines and costs.
Design and Engineering
Vehicles
In addition to the design, development and production of the powertrain, we have created significant in-house capabilities in the design and engineering of electric vehicles and their components and systems. We design and engineer bodies, chassis, interiors, heating and cooling and low voltage electrical systems in-house, and to a lesser extent, in conjunction with our suppliers. Our team has core competencies in computer aided design and crash test simulations, which reduces the product development time of new models.
5
________________________________________
 
Additionally, our team has expertise in lightweight materials, a very important characteristic for electric vehicles given the impact of mass on range. Model S and Model X are built with a lightweight aluminum body and chassis which incorporate a variety of materials and production methods that help optimize the weight of the vehicle. Moreover, we have designed Model 3 with a mix of materials to be lightweight and safe while also increasing cost-effectiveness for this mass-market vehicle. We are designing Model Y on the Model 3 platform and expect that Model Y will share about 75% of its components with Model 3, which we expect will reduce the cost and time to ramp production of Model Y.
Energy Storage
We have an in-house engineering team that both designs our energy storage products themselves, and works with our residential, commercial and utility customers to design bespoke systems incorporating our products. Our team抯 expertise in electrical, mechanical, civil and software engineering enables us to create integrated energy storage solutions that meet the particular needs of all customer types.
Solar Energy Systems
We also have an in-house engineering team that designs a customized solar energy system or Solar Roof for each of our customers, and which works closely with our energy storage engineering teams to integrate an energy storage system when requested by the customer. We have developed software that simplifies and expedites the design process and optimizes the design to maximize the energy production of each system. Our engineers complete a structural analysis of each building and produce a full set of structural design and electrical blueprints that contain the specifications for all system components. Additionally, we design complementary mounting and grounding hardware where required.
Sales and Marketing
Vehicles
Company-Owned Stores and Galleries
We market and sell our vehicles directly to consumers through an international network of company-owned stores and galleries, which we believe enables us to better control costs of inventory, manage warranty service and pricing, maintain and strengthen the Tesla brand, and obtain rapid customer feedback. Our Tesla stores and galleries are highly visible, premium outlets in major metropolitan markets, some of which combine retail sales and service. We have also found that opening a service center in a new geographic area can increase demand. As a result, we have complemented our store strategy with sales facilities and personnel in service centers to more rapidly expand our retail footprint. We refer to these as 揝ervice Plus?locations. 
Used Car Sales
Our used car business supports new car sales by integrating the sale of a new Tesla vehicle with a customer抯 trade-in needs for their existing Tesla and non-Tesla vehicles. The Tesla and non-Tesla vehicles we acquire through trade-ins are subsequently remarketed, either directly by us or through third-party auto auctions. We also receive used Tesla vehicles to resell through lease returns and other sources.
Charging
When not charging at home or at work, Tesla customers can also charge using our Supercharger and Destination Charging networks. In addition, our vehicles can charge at a variety of public charging stations around the world, either natively or through a suite of adapters. This flexibility provides our customers with many charging options to suit various situations.
6
________________________________________
 
We continue to build out our Tesla Supercharger network throughout North America, Europe, Asia and other markets for our customers?convenience, including to enable long-distance travel and urban ownership. Our Supercharger network is a strategic corporate initiative designed to provide publicly accessible fast charging solutions, and remove a barrier to the broader adoption of electric vehicles caused by the perception of limited vehicle range. The Tesla Supercharger is an industrial grade, high speed charger designed to recharge a Tesla vehicle significantly more quickly than other charging options, and we continue to evolve our technology to allow for even faster charging times at lower cost to us. To satisfy growing demand, Supercharger stations typically have between six and thirty Superchargers and are strategically placed along well-traveled routes and in dense city centers to allow Tesla vehicle owners the ability to enjoy quick, reliable and ubiquitous charging with convenient, minimal stops. Use of the Supercharger network is either free or requires a competitive fee.
We work with a wide variety of hospitality, retail, and public destinations, as well as businesses with commuting employees, to offer additional charging options for our customers. These Destination Charging and workplace locations deploy Tesla Wall Connectors to provide charging to Tesla vehicle owners who patronize or are employed at their businesses. We also work with single-family homeowners and multi-family residential entities to deploy home charging solutions in our communities.
Where possible, we are co-locating Superchargers with our solar and energy storage systems to reduce the cost of electricity and promote the use of renewable electricity by Tesla vehicle owners.  
Orders
We offer our customers the flexibility to order vehicles with their desired trims and options by visiting us online at our website or in person at our Tesla stores. 
Marketing
Historically, we have been able to generate significant media coverage of our company and our vehicles, and we believe we will continue to do so. To date, media coverage and word of mouth have been the primary drivers of our vehicle sales leads and have helped us achieve sales without traditional advertising and at relatively low marketing costs.
Solar and Energy Storage
We market and sell our solar and energy storage products to individuals, commercial and industrial customers and utilities through a variety of channels. 
In the U.S., we have been transitioning the direct sales channel for residential solar and energy storage products from former partners to our stores and galleries. We are also continuing to sell residential energy storage products through our network of channel partners. Outside of the U.S., we use our international sales organization and a network of channel partners to market and sell residential energy storage products, and we have recently launched pilot programs for the sale of residential solar in certain countries. We also sell Powerwall 2 directly to utilities, who then deploy the product in customer homes.
We sell Powerpack 2 systems to commercial and utility customers through our international sales organization, which consists of experienced energy industry professionals in all of our target markets, as well as through our channel partner network. In the U.S and Mexico, we also sell installed solar energy systems (with or without energy storage) to commercial customers through cash, lease and PPA transactions.
Service and Warranty
Vehicles
Service
We provide service for our electric vehicles at our company-owned service centers, at our Service Plus locations or through an expanding fleet of Tesla Mobile Service technicians who provide services that do not require a vehicle lift. Performing vehicle service ourselves allows us to identify problems, find solutions, and incorporate improvements faster than incumbent automobile manufacturers. 
7
________________________________________
 
Our vehicles are designed with the capability to wirelessly upload data to us via an on-board system with cellular connectivity, allowing us to diagnose and remedy many problems before ever looking at the vehicle. When maintenance or service is required, a customer can schedule service by contacting one of our Tesla service centers or our Mobile Service technicians can perform an array of services from a customer抯 home or other remote location.
New Vehicle Limited Warranty, Maintenance and Extended Service Plans
We provide a four year or 50,000 mile New Vehicle Limited Warranty with every new vehicle, subject to separate limited warranties for the supplemental restraint system and battery and drive unit. For the battery and drive unit on our current new Model S and Model X vehicles, we offer an eight year, infinite mile limited warranty, although the battery抯 charging capacity is not covered. For the battery and drive unit on our current new Model 3 vehicles, we offer an eight year or 100,000 mile limited warranty for our standard or mid-range battery and an eight year or 120,000 mile limited warranty for our long range battery, with minimum 70% retention of battery capacity over the warranty period.
In addition to the New Vehicle Limited Warranty, we currently offer for Model S and Model X a comprehensive maintenance program for every new vehicle, which includes plans covering prepaid maintenance for up to four years or up to 50,000 miles and an Extended Service plan. The maintenance plans cover annual inspections and the replacement of certain wear and tear parts, excluding tires and the battery. The Extended Service plan covers the repair or replacement of vehicle parts for up to an additional four years or up to an additional 50,000 miles after the New Vehicle Limited Warranty.
Energy Storage
We generally provide a 10 year 搉o defect?and 揺nergy retention?warranty with every Powerwall 2 and a 15 year 搉o defect?and 揺nergy retention?warranty with every Powerpack 2 system. For Powerwall 2, the energy retention warranty involves us guaranteeing that the energy capacity of the product will be 70% or 80% (depending on the region of installation) of its nameplate capacity after 10 years of use. For Powerpack 2, the energy retention warranty involves us guaranteeing a minimum energy capacity in each of its first 15 years of use. For both products, our warranty is subject to specified use restrictions or kWh throughput caps. In addition, we offer certain extended warranties, which customers are able to purchase from us at the time they purchase an energy storage system, including a 20 year extended protection plan for Powerwall 2 and a selection of 10 or 20 year performance guarantees for Powerpack 2. We agree to repair or replace our energy storage products in the event of a valid warranty claim.  In circumstances where we install a Powerwall 2 or Powerpack 2 system, we also provide warranties of up to 20 years on our installation workmanship. All of the warranties for our energy storage systems are subject to customary limitations and exclusions.
Solar Energy Systems
For traditional solar energy systems, we provide a workmanship warranty for up to 20 years from installation and a separate warranty against roof leaks. We also pass-through the inverter and module manufacturer warranties (typically 12 years and 25 years respectively). When we lease a traditional solar energy system, we compensate the customer if their system produces less energy than guaranteed over a specified period. For Solar Roof, we provide a warranty against glass tile chipping or cracking for the lifetime of the home, a 30 year installation warranty, a 30 year weatherization warranty and a power output warranty. For all systems (traditional and Solar Roof) we also provide service and repair (either under warranty or for a fee) during the entire term of the customer relationship.
Financial Services
Vehicles
We offer financing arrangements for our vehicles in North America, Europe and Asia primarily through various financial institutions. We also currently offer Model S and Model X leasing directly through our local subsidiaries in the U.S. and Canada. We intend to broaden our financial services offerings during the next few years. 
8
________________________________________
 
Certain of our current financing programs outside of North America provide customers with a resale value guarantee under which those customers have the option of selling their vehicle back to us at a preset future date, generally at the end of the term of the applicable loan or financing program, for a pre-determined resale value. In certain markets, we also offer vehicle buyback guarantees to financial institutions, which may obligate us to repurchase the vehicles for a pre-determined price.
Solar Energy Systems
We are an industry leader in offering innovative financing alternatives that allow our customers to take direct advantage of available tax credits and incentives to reduce the cost of owning a solar energy system through a solar loan, or to make the switch to solar energy with little to no upfront costs under a lease or PPA. Our solar loan offers third-party financing directly to a qualified customer to enable the customer to purchase and own a solar energy system. We are not a party to the loan agreement between the customer and the third-party lender, and the third-party lender has no recourse against us with respect to the loan. Our solar lease offers customers a fixed monthly fee, at rates that typically translate into lower monthly utility bills, and an electricity production guarantee. Our solar PPA charges customers a fee per kWh based on the amount of electricity produced by our solar energy systems. We monetize the customer payments we receive from our leases and PPAs through funds we have formed with investors. We also intend to introduce financial services offerings for our Solar Roof customers in the future. 
Energy Storage
We currently offer a loan product to residential customers who purchase Powerwall 2 together with a new solar energy system, and lease and PPAs to commercial customers who purchase a Powerpack 2 system together with a new solar energy system. We intend to introduce financial services offerings for customers who purchase standalone energy storage products in the future.
Manufacturing
Vehicles
We conduct vehicle manufacturing and assembly operations at our facilities in Fremont, California; Lathrop, California; and Tilburg, Netherlands. We have also built and continue to expand Gigafactory 1, a manufacturing facility for battery cells, modules, packs and storage products and vehicle components, outside of Reno, Nevada. We are also constructing Gigafactory Shanghai, a manufacturing facility in China, for the production of Model 3 vehicles for the local market.
Manufacturing Facilities in Fremont, CA and Lathrop, CA
We manufacture our vehicles, and certain parts and components that are critical to our intellectual property and quality standards, at our manufacturing facilities in Fremont, CA, including the Tesla Factory, and our manufacturing facility in Lathrop, CA. Our Fremont facilities contain several manufacturing operations, including stamping, machining, casting, plastics, body assembly, paint operations, drive unit production, seat assembly, final vehicle assembly and end-of-line testing. In addition, we manufacture lithium-ion battery packs, electric motors, gearboxes and components for Model S and Model X at the Tesla Factory. Some major vehicle component systems are purchased from suppliers; however, we have a high level of vertical integration in our manufacturing processes at the Tesla Factory. 
The Netherlands
Our European headquarters and manufacturing facilities are located in Amsterdam and Tilburg. Our operations in Tilburg include final assembly, testing and quality control for Model S and Model X vehicles delivered within the European Union, a parts distribution warehouse for service centers throughout Europe, a center for remanufacturing work and a customer service center.
Gigafactory 1 outside of Reno, Nevada
Gigafactory 1 is a facility where we work together with our suppliers to integrate battery material, cell, module and battery pack production in one location. We use the battery packs manufactured at Gigafactory 1 for our vehicles, including Model 3, and energy storage products. We also manufacture Model 3 drive units at Gigafactory 1.
9
________________________________________
 
Gigafactory 1 is being built in phases. Tesla, Panasonic and other partners are currently manufacturing inside the finished sections. Our present plan is to continue expanding Gigafactory 1 over the next few years so that its capacity significantly exceeds the approximately 500,000 vehicle per year capacity that we announced when we first started developing it, and we have additionally added capacity for manufacturing our energy storage products. We have also announced that we will likely manufacture Model Y, which we intend to produce at high volumes by the end of 2020, at Gigafactory 1.
We believe that Gigafactory 1 will allow us to achieve a significant reduction in the cost of our battery packs with our volume production of Model 3. We have an agreement with Panasonic to partner with us on Gigafactory 1 with investments in production equipment that it is using to manufacture and supply us with battery cells. Through our ownership of Gigafactory 1 and our partnership with Panasonic, we own sole access to a facility designed to be the highest-volume and lowest-cost source of lithium-ion batteries in the world.
Gigafactory Shanghai
We are constructing Gigafactory Shanghai in order to significantly increase the affordability of Model 3 for customers in China by reducing transportation and manufacturing costs and eliminating certain tariffs on vehicles imported from the U.S. We broke ground in January 2019, and subject to a number of uncertainties, including regulatory approval, supply chain constraints, and the pace of installing production equipment and bringing the factory online, we expect to begin production of certain trims of Model 3 at Gigafactory Shanghai by the end of 2019. We expect much of the investment in Gigafactory Shanghai to be provided through local debt financing, supported by limited direct capital expenditures by us. Moreover, we are targeting the capital expenditures per unit of production capacity at this factory to be less than that of our Model 3 production at the Tesla Factory, from which we have drawn learnings that should allow us to simplify our manufacturing layout and processes at Gigafactory Shanghai.
Supply Chain
Our vehicles use thousands of purchased parts which we source globally from hundreds of suppliers. We have developed close relationships with several key suppliers particularly in the procurement of cells and certain other key system parts. While we obtain components from multiple sources in some cases, similar to other automobile manufacturers, many of the components used in our vehicles are purchased by us from a single source. In addition, while several sources of the battery cell we have selected for our battery packs are available, we have currently fully qualified only one cell supplier for the battery packs we use in our production vehicles. We are working to fully qualify additional cells from other manufacturers.
We use various raw materials in our business including aluminum, steel, cobalt, lithium, nickel and copper. The prices for these raw materials fluctuate depending on market conditions and global demand for these materials. We believe that we have adequate supplies or sources of availability of the raw materials necessary to meet our manufacturing and supply requirements.
Energy Storage
Our energy storage products are manufactured at Gigafactory 1. We leverage the same supply chain process and infrastructure as we use for our vehicles. The battery architecture and many of the components used in our energy storage products are the same or similar to those used in our vehicles?battery pack, enabling us to take advantage of manufacturing efficiencies and supply chain economies of scale. The power electronics and inverters for the Powerwall and Powerpack systems are also manufactured at Gigafactory 1, allowing us to ship deployment-ready systems directly to customers.
10
________________________________________
 
Solar Energy Systems
We currently purchase major components such as solar panels and inverters directly from multiple manufacturers. We typically purchase solar panels and inverters on an as-needed basis from our suppliers at then-prevailing prices pursuant to purchase orders issued under our master contractual arrangements. In December 2016, we entered into a long-term agreement with Panasonic to manufacture photovoltaic (揚V? cells and modules with negotiated pricing provisions at our Gigafactory 2 in Buffalo, New York with the intended capacity to manufacture at least 1.0 gigawatt (揋W? of solar products annually. We have recently started manufacturing solar panels at this facility in collaboration with Panasonic.
Governmental Programs, Incentives and Regulations
Vehicles
California Alternative Energy and Advanced Transportation Financing Authority Tax Incentives
We have entered into multiple agreements over the past few years with the California Alternative Energy and Advanced Transportation Financing Authority (揅AEATFA? that provide multi-year sales tax exclusions on purchases of manufacturing equipment that will be used for specific purposes, including the expansion and ongoing development of Model S, Model X, Model 3 and future electric vehicles and the expansion of electric vehicle powertrain production in California. 
Nevada Tax Incentives
In connection with the construction of Gigafactory 1, we have entered into agreements with the State of Nevada and Storey County in Nevada that provide abatements for sales, use, real property, personal property and employer excise taxes, discounts to the base tariff energy rates and transferable tax credits. These incentives are available for the applicable periods beginning on October 17, 2014 and ending on either June 30, 2024 or June 30, 2034 (depending on the incentive). Under these agreements, we were eligible for a maximum of $195.0 million of transferable tax credits, subject to capital investments by us and our partners for Gigafactory 1 of at least $3.50 billion, which we exceeded during 2017, and specified hiring targets for Gigafactory 1, which we exceeded during 2018. As a result, as of December 31, 2018, we had earned the maximum amount of credits.
Tesla Regulatory Credits
In connection with the production, delivery, placement into service and ongoing operation of our zero emission vehicles, charging infrastructure and solar systems in global markets, we have earned and will continue to earn various tradable regulatory credits. We have sold these credits, and will continue to sell future credits, to automotive companies and other regulated entities who can use the credits to comply with emission standards and other regulatory requirements. For example, under California抯 Zero Emission Vehicle Regulation and those of states that have adopted California抯 standard, vehicle manufacturers are required to earn or purchase credits, referred to as ZEV credits, for compliance with their annual regulatory requirements. These laws provide that automakers may bank or sell to other regulated parties their excess credits if they earn more credits than the minimum quantity required by those laws. Tesla also earns other types of salable regulatory credits in the United States and abroad, including greenhouse gas, fuel economy and clean fuels credits. Likewise, several U.S. states have adopted procurement requirements for renewable energy production. These requirements enable companies deploying solar energy to earn tradable credits known as Solar Renewable Energy Certificates (揝RECs?.
Regulation梀ehicle Safety and Testing
Our vehicles are subject to, and comply with or are otherwise exempt from, numerous regulatory requirements established by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (揘HTSA?, including all applicable United States Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (揊MVSS?. Our vehicles fully comply with all applicable FMVSSs without the need for any exemptions, and we expect future Tesla vehicles to either fully comply or comply with limited exemptions related to new technologies. Additionally, there are regulatory changes being considered for several FMVSS, and while we anticipate compliance, there is no assurance until final regulation changes are enacted.
11
________________________________________
 
As a manufacturer, we must self-certify that our vehicles meet all applicable FMVSS, as well as the NHTSA bumper standard, or otherwise are exempt, before the vehicles can be imported or sold in the U.S. Numerous FMVSS apply to our vehicles, such as crash-worthiness requirements, crash avoidance requirements, and electric vehicle requirements. We are also required to comply with other federal laws administered by NHTSA, including the CAFE standards, Theft Prevention Act requirements, consumer information labeling requirements, Early Warning Reporting requirements regarding warranty claims, field reports, death and injury reports and foreign recalls, and owner抯 manual requirements.
The Automobile Information and Disclosure Act requires manufacturers of motor vehicles to disclose certain information regarding the manufacturer抯 suggested retail price, optional equipment and pricing. In addition, this law allows inclusion of city and highway fuel economy ratings, as determined by EPA, as well as crash test ratings as determined by NHTSA if such tests are conducted.
Our vehicles sold outside of the U.S. are subject to similar foreign safety, environmental and other regulations. Many of those regulations are different from those applicable in the U.S. and may require redesign and/or retesting. The European Union has established new rules regarding additional compliance oversight that are scheduled to commence in 2020, and there is also regulatory uncertainty related to the United Kingdom抯 impending withdrawal from the European Union.  These changes could impact the rollout of new vehicle features in Europe.
Regulation ?Self Driving
There are no federal U.S. regulations pertaining to the safety of self-driving vehicles; however, NHTSA has established recommended guidelines. Certain U.S. states have legal restrictions on self-driving vehicles, and many other states are considering them. This patchwork increases the legal complexity for our vehicles. In Europe, certain vehicle safety regulations apply to self-driving braking and steering systems, and certain treaties also restrict the legality of certain higher levels of self-driving vehicles. Self-driving laws and regulations are expected to continue to evolve in numerous jurisdictions in the U.S. and foreign countries, and may create restrictions on self-driving features that we develop.
Regulation桞attery Safety and Testing
Our battery pack conforms to mandatory regulations that govern transport of 揹angerous goods,?defined to include lithium-ion batteries, which may present a risk in transportation. The regulations vary by mode of shipping transportation, such as by ocean vessel, rail, truck, or air. We have completed the applicable transportation tests for our battery packs, demonstrating our compliance with applicable regulations.
We use lithium-ion cells in our high voltage battery packs. The use, storage, and disposal of our battery packs is regulated under federal law. We have agreements with third party battery recycling companies to recycle our battery packs. 
Automobile Manufacturer and Dealer Regulation
State laws regulate the manufacture, distribution, and sale of automobiles, and generally require motor vehicle manufacturers and dealers to be licensed in order to sell vehicles directly to consumers in the state. As we open additional Tesla stores and service centers, we secure dealer licenses (or their equivalent) and engage in sales activities to sell our vehicles directly to consumers. A few states, such as Michigan and Connecticut, do not permit automobile manufacturers to be licensed as dealers or to act in the capacity of a dealer, or otherwise restrict a manufacturer抯 ability to deliver or service vehicles. To sell vehicles to residents of states where we are not licensed as a dealer, we generally conduct the sale out of the state via the Internet, phone or mail. In such states, we have opened 揼alleries?that serve an educational purpose and are not sales locations.
As we expand our retail footprint in the U.S., some automobile dealer trade associations have both challenged the legality of our operations in court and used administrative and legislative processes to attempt to prohibit or limit our ability to operate existing stores or expand to new locations. We expect that the dealer associations will continue to mount challenges to our business model. In addition, we expect the dealer associations to actively lobby state licensing agencies and legislators to interpret existing laws or enact new laws in ways not favorable to Tesla抯 ownership and operation of its own retail and service locations, and we intend to actively fight any such efforts to limit our ability to sell our own vehicles.
12
________________________________________
 
Energy Storage
The regulatory regime for energy storage projects is still under development. Nevertheless, there are various policies, incentives and financial mechanisms at the federal, state and local levels that support the adoption of energy storage. For example, energy storage systems that are charged using solar energy are eligible for the 30% tax credit under Section 48(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, or the IRC, as described below. In addition, California and a number of other states have adopted procurement targets for energy storage, and behind the meter energy storage systems qualify for funding under the California Self Generation Incentive Program.
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (揊ERC? has also taken steps to enable the participation of energy storage in wholesale energy markets. In 2011 and 2013, FERC removed many barriers for systems like energy storage to provide frequency regulation service, thus increasing the value these systems can obtain in wholesale energy markets. More recently, in late 2016, FERC released a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that, if it becomes a final rule, would further break down barriers preventing energy storage from fully participating in wholesale energy markets. Finally, in January 2017, FERC issued a statement supporting the use of energy storage as both electric transmission and as electric generation concurrently, thus enabling energy storage systems to provide greater value to the electric grid.
Solar Energy Systems
Government and Utility Programs and Incentives
U.S. federal, state and local governments have established various policies, incentives and financial mechanisms to reduce the cost of solar energy and to accelerate the adoption of solar energy. These incentives include tax credits, cash grants, tax abatements and rebates.
The federal government currently provides an uncapped investment tax credit (揑TC? under two sections of the IRC: Section 48 and Section 25D. Section 48(a)(3) of the IRC allows a taxpayer to claim a credit of 30% of qualified expenditures for a commercial solar energy system that commences construction by December 31, 2019. The credit then declines to 26% in 2020, 22% in 2021, and a permanent 10% thereafter. We claim the Section 48 commercial credit when available for both our residential and commercial projects, based on ownership of the solar energy system. The federal government also provides accelerated depreciation for eligible commercial solar energy systems. Section 25D of the IRC allows a homeowner-taxpayer to claim a credit of 30% of qualified expenditures for a residential solar energy system owned by the homeowner that is placed in service by December 31, 2019. The credit then declines to 26% in 2020 and 22% in 2021, and is scheduled to expire thereafter. Customers who purchase their solar energy systems for cash or through our solar loan offering are eligible to claim the Section 25D investment tax credit.
In addition to the federal ITC, many U.S. states offer personal and corporate tax credits and incentives for solar energy systems.
Regulation ?General
We are not a 搑egulated utility?in the U.S. To operate our systems, we obtain interconnection agreements from the utilities. In most cases, interconnection agreements are standard form agreements that have been pre-approved by the public utility commission or other regulatory body. 
Sales of electricity and non-sale equipment leases by third parties, such as our leases and PPAs, face regulatory challenges in some states and jurisdictions.
Regulation ?Net Metering
Most states in the U.S. have a regulatory policy known as net energy metering, or net metering, available to solar customers. Net metering typically allows solar customers to interconnect their on-site solar energy systems to the utility grid and offset their utility electricity purchases by receiving a bill credit for excess energy generated by their solar energy system that is exported to the grid. In certain jurisdictions, regulators or utilities have reduced or eliminated the benefit available under net metering, or have proposed to do so.
13
________________________________________
 
Regulation ?Mandated Renewable Capacity
Many states also have adopted procurement requirements for renewable energy production, such as an enforceable renewable portfolio standard, or RPS, or other policies that require covered entities to procure a specified percentage of total electricity delivered to customers in the state from eligible renewable energy sources, such as solar energy systems. In SREC state markets, the RPS requires electricity suppliers to secure a portion of their electricity from solar generators. The SREC program provides a means for SRECs to be created. A SREC represents the renewable energy associated with 1,000 kWhs of electricity produced from a solar energy system. When a solar energy system generates 1,000 kWhs of electricity, one SREC is issued by a government agency, which can then be sold separately from the energy produced to covered entities who surrender the SRECs to the state to prove compliance with the state抯 renewable energy mandate.
Competition
Vehicles
The worldwide automotive market is highly competitive and we expect it will become even more competitive in the future as we introduce additional vehicles in a broader cross-section of the passenger and commercial vehicle market.
We believe that our vehicles compete in the market both based on their traditional segment classification as well as based on their propulsion technology. For example, Model S and Model X compete primarily with premium sedans and premium SUVs and Model 3 competes with small to medium-sized sedans, which are extremely competitive markets with internal combustion vehicles from more established automobile manufacturers. 
Moreover, many established and new automobile manufacturers have entered or have announced plans to enter the alternative fuel vehicle market. Overall, we believe these announcements and vehicle introductions promote the development of the alternative fuel vehicle market by highlighting the attractiveness of alternative fuel vehicles, particularly those fueled by electricity, relative to the internal combustion vehicle. Many major automobile manufacturers have electric vehicles available today, and other current and prospective automobile manufacturers are also developing electric vehicles. Electric vehicles have also already been brought to market in China and other foreign countries and we expect a number of those manufacturers to enter the U.S. market as well. In addition, several manufacturers offer hybrid vehicles, including plug-in versions. 
Energy Storage
The market for energy storage products is also highly competitive. Established companies, such as AES Energy Storage, Siemens, LG Chem and Samsung, as well as various emerging companies, have introduced products that are similar to our product portfolio. There are several companies providing individual components of energy storage systems (such as cells, battery modules, and power electronics) as well as others providing integrated systems. We compete with these companies based on price, energy density and efficiency. We believe that the specifications of our products, our strong brand, and the modular, scalable nature of our Powerpack 2 product give us a competitive advantage when marketing our products.
Solar Energy Systems
The primary competitors to our solar energy business are the traditional local utility companies that supply energy to our potential customers. We compete with these traditional utility companies primarily based on price, predictability of price and the ease by which customers can switch to electricity generated by our solar energy systems. We also compete with solar energy companies that provide products and services similar to ours. Many solar energy companies only install solar energy systems, while others only provide financing for these installations. In the residential solar energy system installation market, our primary competitors include Vivint Solar Inc., Sunrun Inc., Trinity Solar, SunPower Corporation, and many smaller local solar companies.
14
________________________________________
 
Intellectual Property
As part of our business, we seek to protect our intellectual property rights such as with respect to patents, trademarks, copyrights, trade secrets, including through employee and third party nondisclosure agreements, and other contractual arrangements. Additionally, we previously announced a patent policy in which we irrevocably pledged that we will not initiate a lawsuit against any party for infringing our patents through activity relating to electric vehicles or related equipment for so long as such party is acting in good faith. We made this pledge in order to encourage the advancement of a common, rapidly-evolving platform for electric vehicles, thereby benefiting ourselves, other companies making electric vehicles, and the world.
Segment Information
We operate as two reportable segments: automotive and energy generation and storage.
The automotive segment includes the design, development, manufacturing, sales, and leasing of electric vehicles as well as sales of automotive regulatory credits. Additionally, the automotive segment is also comprised of services and other, which includes non-warranty after-sales vehicle services, sales of used vehicles, sales of electric vehicle components and systems to other manufacturers, retail merchandise, and sales by our acquired subsidiaries to third party customers. The energy generation and storage segment includes the design, manufacture, installation, and sale or leasing of stationary energy storage products and solar energy systems, and sale of electricity generated by our solar energy systems to customers.
Employees
As of December 31, 2018, Tesla, Inc. had 48,817 full-time employees. To date, we have not experienced any work stoppages, and we consider our relationship with our employees to be good.
Available Information
We file or furnish periodic reports and amendments thereto, including our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K, proxy statements and other information with the Securities and Exchange Commission (揝EC?. In addition, the SEC maintains a website (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file electronically. Our website is located at www.tesla.com, and our reports, amendments thereto, proxy statements and other information are also made available, free of charge, on our investor relations website at ir.tesla.com as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file or furnish such information with the SEC. The information posted on our website is not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 
 
15
________________________________________
 
ITEM 1A.	RISK FACTORS
You should carefully consider the risks described below together with the other information set forth in this report, which could materially affect our business, financial condition and future results. The risks described below are not the only risks facing our company. Risks and uncertainties not currently known to us or that we currently deem to be immaterial also may materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and operating results. 
Risks Related to Our Business and Industry
We have experienced in the past, and may experience in the future, delays or other complications in the design, manufacture, launch, production, delivery and servicing ramp of new vehicles and other products such as Model 3, Model Y, our energy storage products and Solar Roof, which could harm our brand, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.
We have previously experienced launch, manufacturing, production and delivery ramp delays or other complications in connection with new vehicle models such as Model S, Model X and Model 3, new vehicle features such as the all-wheel drive dual motor drivetrain on Model S and the second version of Autopilot hardware, and a significant increase in automation introduced in the manufacture of Model 3. For example, we encountered unanticipated challenges, such as certain supply chain constraints, that led to initial delays in producing Model X. Similarly, we experienced certain challenges in the production of Model 3 that led to delays in its ramp. Moreover, in the areas of Model 3 production where we had challenges ramping fully automated processes, such as portions of the battery module assembly line, material flow system and the general assembly line, we reduced the levels of automation and introduced semi-automated or manual processes. If issues like these arise or recur, if our remediation measures and process changes do not continue to be successful, if we experience issues with transitioning to full automation in certain production lines or to other planned manufacturing improvements, or if we experience issues or delays in building our Gigafactory Shanghai in China or commencing and ramping Model 3 production there, we could experience issues in sustaining the Model 3 ramp or delays in increasing Model 3 production further. Also, if we encounter difficulties in scaling our delivery or servicing capabilities for Model 3 or future vehicles and products to high volumes in the U.S. or internationally, our financial condition and operating results could suffer. In addition, because our vehicle models share certain production facilities with other vehicle models, the volume or efficiency of production with respect to one model may impact the production of other models or lead to bottlenecks that impact the production of all models.
We may also experience similar future delays or other complications in bringing to market and ramping production of new vehicles, such as Model Y, the Tesla Semi, our planned pickup truck and new Tesla Roadster, our energy storage products and Solar Roof. Any significant additional delay or other complication in the production of and delivery capabilities for our current products or the development, manufacture, launch, production and delivery and servicing capability ramp of our future products, including complications associated with expanding our production capacity, supply chain and delivery systems or obtaining or maintaining regulatory approvals, could materially damage our brand, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.
We have experienced in the past, and may experience in the future, delays in realizing our projected timelines and cost and volume targets for the production and ramp of Model 3, which could harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.
Our future business depends in large part on our ability to execute on our plans to manufacture, market and sell the Model 3 vehicle, which we are offering at a lower price point and which we are producing at significantly higher volumes than the Model S or Model X vehicles. We commenced production and initial customer deliveries of Model 3 in July 2017, and since then have achieved a stabilized production rate. At the Tesla Factory, we expect to continue to increase our Model 3 production rate to approximately 7,000 units per week on a sustained basis by the end of 2019. Moreover, in China, we expect to commence production of certain trims of Model 3 for the local market in China in the initial phase of our Gigafactory Shanghai by the end of 2019, and then progressively increase levels of localization through local sourcing and manufacturing. Inclusive of Gigafactory Shanghai, our goal is to be able to produce 10,000 Model 3 vehicles per week on a sustained basis, and an annualized output rate in excess of 500,000 Model 3 vehicles sometime between the fourth quarter of 2019 and the second quarter of 2020. However, the timeframe for commencing Model 3 production at Gigafactory Shanghai is subject to a number of uncertainties, including regulatory approval, supply chain constraints, and the pace of installing production equipment and bringing the factory online.
16
________________________________________
 
We have limited experience to date in manufacturing vehicles at the high volumes that we recently achieved and to which we anticipate ramping further for Model 3, and to be successful, we will need to complete the implementation and ramp of efficient and cost-effective manufacturing capabilities, processes and supply chains necessary to support such volumes, including at Gigafactory Shanghai. We are employing a higher degree of automation in the manufacturing processes for Model 3 than we have previously employed and to continue to implement additional automation. In some cases, we have temporarily reduced the levels of automation and introduced semi-automated or manual processes, at additional labor cost. Additional bottlenecks may also arise as we continue to ramp production at the Tesla Factory and commence the initial phase of Model 3 production at Gigafactory Shanghai, and it will be important that we address them promptly and in a cost-effective manner. Moreover, our Model 3 production plan has generally required to date significant investments of cash and management resources, and we expect to deploy some level of additional resources as we further progress our ramp and begin production in new locations in the future, such as China.
Our production plan for Model 3 is based on many key assumptions, including:
 	?that we will be able to sustain and further expand our high-volume production of Model 3 at the Tesla Factory without exceeding our projected costs and on our projected timeline;
 	?that we will be able to continue to expand Gigafactory 1 in a timely manner to produce high volumes of quality lithium-ion cells to be integrated into battery modules and finished battery packs and drive unit components for Model 3, including in part to support production in China as the level of local sourcing and manufacturing there progressively increases, all at costs that allow us to sell Model 3 at our target gross margins;
 	?that we will be able to build and commence production at additional future facilities, such as at Gigafactory Shanghai, to support our international ramp for Model 3 in accordance with our projected costs and timeline;
 	?that the equipment and processes which we have selected for Model 3 production will be able to accurately manufacture high volumes of Model 3 vehicles within specified design tolerances and with high quality;
 	?that we will be able to maintain suppliers for the necessary components on terms and conditions that are acceptable to us and that we will be able to obtain high-quality components on a timely basis and in the necessary quantities to support high-volume production; and
 	?that we will be able to attract, recruit, hire, train and retain skilled employees to operate our planned high-volume production facilities to support Model 3, including at the Tesla Factory, Gigafactory 1 and Gigafactory Shanghai.
If one or more of the foregoing assumptions turns out to be incorrect, our ability to meet our Model 3 projections on time and at volumes and prices that are profitable, the demand for and deliveries of Model 3, as well as our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition, may be materially and adversely impacted. 
We may be unable to meet our growing vehicle production, sales and delivery plans and servicing needs, any of which could harm our business and prospects.
Our plans call for sustaining and further ramping from our significant increases in vehicle production and deliveries, particularly for Model 3. Our ability to achieve these plans will depend upon a number of factors, including our ability to utilize installed manufacturing capacity to achieve the planned production yield, further install and increase capacity in accordance with our planned timelines and costs, maintain our desired quality levels and optimize design and production changes, as well as our suppliers?ability to support our needs. In addition, we have used and may use in the future a number of new manufacturing technologies, techniques and processes for our vehicles, which we must successfully introduce and scale for high-volume production. For example, we have introduced highly automated production lines, aluminum spot welding systems and high-speed blow forming of certain difficult to stamp vehicle parts. We have also introduced unique design features in our vehicles with different manufacturing challenges, such as large display screens, dual motor drivetrain, Autopilot hardware and falcon-wing doors. We have limited experience developing, manufacturing, selling and servicing, and allocating our available resources among, multiple products simultaneously. If we are unable to realize our plans, our brand, business, prospects, financial condition and operating results could be materially damaged.
17
________________________________________
 
Concurrent with our increasing vehicle production levels, we will also need to continue to significantly increase sales and deliveries of our vehicles. Although we have a plan for selling and delivering increased volumes of vehicles, we have limited experience in marketing, selling and delivering vehicles at the higher volumes at which we are manufacturing Model 3, and we may face difficulties meeting our sales and delivery goals in both existing markets as well as new markets into which we expand, such as Europe and China where we are beginning to deliver Model 3 for the first time in the first quarter of 2019. In particular, we are targeting for the first time with Model 3 a mass demographic with a broad range of potential customers, in which we have limited experience projecting demand and pricing our products. While we are producing numerous variants (including regional versions) of Model 3 in accordance with the demand that we expect for them, if our projections are inaccurate, we may not be able to generate sales matched to the specific vehicles that we have the capacity to produce, based on vehicle production line constraints and long lead times for procuring certain parts.
Moreover, because we do not have independent dealer networks, we are responsible for delivering all of our vehicles to our customers and meeting their vehicle servicing needs. To date, we have limited experience with such deliveries and servicing at the scale to which we expect to grow, particularly in international markets. To accommodate our volumes, we have deployed a number of delivery models, such as deliveries to customers?homes and workplaces, some of which have not been previously tested at scale and in different geographies. Moreover, significant transit time may be required to transport vehicles such as Model 3 in volume into new markets for the first time. To the extent that such factors lead to delays in our deliveries, our results may be negatively impacted. Finally, because of our unique expertise with our vehicles, we recommend that our vehicles be serviced by our service centers, Mobile Service technicians or certain authorized professionals that we have specifically trained and equipped. If we experience delays in adding such servicing capacity or experience unforeseen issues with the reliability of Model 3, which we recently commenced producing at volume, it could overburden our servicing capabilities. If we are unable to ramp up to meet our sales, delivery and servicing targets globally, or our projections on which such targets are based are inaccurate, this could result in negative publicity and damage to our brand and have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.
Our future growth and success is dependent upon consumers?willingness to adopt electric vehicles and specifically our vehicles, especially in the mass market demographic which we are targeting with Model 3.
Our growth is highly dependent upon the adoption by consumers of alternative fuel vehicles in general and electric vehicles in particular. Although we have successfully grown demand for our vehicles thus far, there is no guarantee of such future demand, or that our vehicles will not compete with one another in the market. Moreover, the Model 3 mass market demographic is larger, but more competitive, than the demographic for Model S and Model X, and additional electric vehicles are entering the market. 
If the market for electric vehicles in general and Tesla vehicles in particular does not develop as we expect, or develops more slowly than we expect, or if demand for our vehicles decreases in our markets, our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results could be harmed. We have only recently begun high volume production of vehicles, are still at an earlier stage and have limited resources relative to our competitors, and the market for alternative fuel vehicles is rapidly evolving. As a result, the market for our vehicles could be affected by numerous factors, such as: 
 	?perceptions about electric vehicle features, quality, safety, performance and cost; 
 	?perceptions about the limited range over which electric vehicles may be driven on a single battery charge; 
 	?competition, including from other types of alternative fuel vehicles, plug-in hybrid electric vehicles and high fuel-economy internal combustion engine vehicles; 
 	?volatility in the cost of oil and gasoline; 
 	?government regulations and economic incentives;
 	?access to charging facilities; and
 	?concerns about our future viability.
18
________________________________________
 
We are dependent on our suppliers, the majority of which are single-source suppliers, and the inability of these suppliers to deliver necessary components of our products according to our schedule and at prices, quality levels and volumes acceptable to us, or our inability to efficiently manage these components, could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.
Our products contain numerous purchased parts which we source globally from hundreds of direct suppliers, the majority of whom are currently single-source suppliers, although we attempt to qualify and obtain components from multiple sources whenever feasible. Any significant increases in our production may require us to procure additional components in a short amount of time, and in the past we have also replaced certain suppliers because of their failure to provide components that met our quality control standards. While we believe that we will be able to secure additional or alternate sources of supply for most of our components in a relatively short time frame, there is no assurance that we will be able to do so or develop our own replacements for certain highly customized components of our products. Moreover, we have signed long-term agreements with Panasonic to be our manufacturing partner and supplier for lithium-ion cells at Gigafactory 1 in Nevada and PV cells and panels at Gigafactory 2 in Buffalo, New York. If we encounter unexpected difficulties with key suppliers such as Panasonic, and if we are unable to fill these needs from other suppliers, we could experience production delays and potential loss of access to important technology and parts for producing, servicing and supporting our products.
This limited, and in many cases single source, supply chain exposes us to multiple potential sources of delivery failure or component shortages for the production of our products, such as those which we experienced in 2012 and 2016 in connection with our slower-than-planned Model S and Model X ramps. Furthermore, unexpected changes in business conditions, materials pricing, labor issues, wars, governmental changes, natural disasters such as the March 2011 earthquakes in Japan and other factors beyond our and our suppliers?control, could also affect our suppliers?ability to deliver components to us on a timely basis. The loss of any single or limited source supplier or the disruption in the supply of components from these suppliers could lead to product design changes and delays in product deliveries to our customers, which could hurt our relationships with our customers and result in negative publicity, damage to our brand and a material and adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.
Changes in our supply chain have also resulted in the past, and may result in the future, in increased cost. We have also experienced cost increases from certain of our suppliers in order to meet our quality targets and development timelines as well as due to our design changes, and we may experience similar cost increases in the future. Certain suppliers have sought to renegotiate the terms of supply arrangements. Additionally, we are negotiating with existing suppliers for cost reductions, seeking new and less expensive suppliers for certain parts, and attempting to redesign certain parts to make them less expensive to produce. If we are unsuccessful in our efforts to control and reduce supplier costs, our operating results will suffer. 
In particular, because we are producing Model 3 at significantly higher volumes than any of our other products to date, the negative impact of any delays or other constraints with respect to our suppliers for Model 3 could be substantially greater than any supply chain-related issues experienced with respect to our other products. We need our Model 3 suppliers to sustainably ramp in accordance with our ongoing ramp of Model 3 and deliver according to our schedule. There is no assurance that these suppliers will ultimately be able to sustainably and timely meet our cost, quality and volume needs. For example, we may experience issues or delays increasing the level of localization in China through local sourcing and manufacturing at our Gigafactory Shanghai. Furthermore, as the scale of our vehicle production increases, we will need to accurately forecast, purchase, warehouse and transport to our manufacturing facilities components at much higher volumes. If we are unable to accurately match the timing and quantities of component purchases to our actual needs, or successfully implement automation, inventory management and other systems to accommodate the increased complexity in our supply chain, we may incur unexpected production disruption, storage, transportation and write-off costs, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.
19
________________________________________
 
Future problems or delays in expanding Gigafactory 1 or ramping operations there could negatively affect the production and profitability of our products, such as Model 3 and our energy storage products.
To lower the cost of cell production and produce cells in high volume, we have vertically integrated the production of lithium-ion cells and finished battery packs for Model 3 and energy storage products at Gigafactory 1. While Gigafactory 1 began producing lithium-ion cells for energy storage products in January 2017 and has since begun producing lithium-ion cells for Model 3, we have no other direct experience in the production of lithium-ion cells. Given the size and complexity of this undertaking, it is possible that future events could result in issues or delays in further ramping and expanding production at Gigafactory 1. Moreover, we expect that we will need additional production at Gigafactory 1 to support vehicle production at Gigafactory Shanghai in part when we commence Model 3 production there. In order to achieve our volume and gross margin targets for Model 3 and the anticipated ramp in production of energy storage products, we must continue to sustain and ramp significant cell production at Gigafactory 1, which, among other things, requires Panasonic to successfully operate and further ramp its cell production lines at significant volumes. Although Panasonic has a long track record of producing high-quality cells at significant volume at its factories in Japan, it has limited experience with cell production at Gigafactory 1. In addition, we produce several components for Model 3, such as battery modules incorporating the lithium-ion cells produced by Panasonic, and drive units, at Gigafactory 1. Some of the manufacturing lines for such components took longer than anticipated to ramp to their full capacity. While we have largely overcome this bottleneck after deploying multiple semi-automated lines and improving our original lines, additional bottlenecks may arise as we continue to increase the production rate. Finally, we have announced that we will likely manufacture Model Y at Gigafactory 1. If we are unable to maintain Gigafactory 1 production, ramp additionally over time as needed, and do so cost-effectively, or if we or Panasonic are unable to attract, hire and retain a substantial number of highly skilled personnel, our ability to supply battery packs or other components for Model 3 and our other products could be negatively impacted, which could negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.
If our vehicles or other products that we sell or install fail to perform as expected, our ability to develop, market and sell our products and services could be harmed.
If our vehicles or our energy products contain defects in design and manufacture that cause them not to perform as expected or that require repair, or certain features of our vehicles, such as full self-driving, take longer than expected to become enabled or are legally restricted, our ability to develop, market and sell our products and services could be harmed. For example, the operation of our vehicles is highly dependent on software, which is inherently complex and may contain latent defects and errors or be subject to external attacks. Issues experienced by vehicle customers have included those related to the software for the 17 inch display screen, the panoramic roof and the 12-volt battery in the Model S and the seats and doors in the Model X. Although we attempt to remedy any issues we observe in our products as effectively and rapidly as possible, such efforts may not be timely, may hamper production or may not be to the satisfaction of our customers. While we have performed extensive internal testing on the products we manufacture, we currently have a limited frame of reference by which to evaluate detailed long-term quality, reliability, durability and performance characteristics of our battery packs, powertrains, vehicles and energy storage products. There can be no assurance that we will be able to detect and fix any defects in our products prior to their sale to or installation for consumers. 
Any product defects, delays or legal restrictions on product features, or other failure of our products to perform as expected, could harm our reputation and result in delivery delays, product recalls, product liability claims, and significant warranty and other expenses, and could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, operating results and prospects. 
20
________________________________________
 
If we fail to scale our business operations and otherwise manage future growth and adapt to new conditions effectively as we rapidly grow our company, including internationally, we may not be able to produce, market, sell and service our products successfully.
Any failure to manage our growth effectively could materially and adversely affect our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. We expect to continue to expand our operations significantly, including internationally and with our increasing production of Model 3, and the worldwide sales, delivery and servicing of a significantly higher number of vehicles than our current vehicle fleet in the coming years. Furthermore, we are developing and growing our energy storage product and solar business worldwide, including in countries where we have limited or no previous operating experience. Our future operating results depend to a large extent on our ability to manage our expansion and growth successfully. We may not be successful in undertaking this global expansion if we are unable to control expenses and avoid cost overruns and other unexpected operating costs, establish sufficient worldwide automobile sales, delivery, service and Supercharger facilities in a timely manner, adapt our products and conduct our operations to meet local requirements, implement required local infrastructure, systems and processes, and find and hire a significant number of additional manufacturing, engineering, service, electrical installation, construction and administrative personnel.
In particular, we plan to expand our manufacturing capabilities outside of the U.S., where we have limited experience operating a factory or managing related regulatory, financing and other challenges. For example, as part of our continuing work to increase Model 3 production to 10,000 vehicles per week on a sustained basis and make Model 3 affordable in the markets where we plan to offer it, we expect to commence the initial phase of Model 3 production at Gigafactory Shanghai for the local market in China by the end of 2019, although the timeframe for that is subject to a number of uncertainties, including regulatory approval, supply chain constraints, and the pace of installing production equipment and bringing the factory online. As we expect to commence our manufacturing activities in China using progressively increased levels of localization through local sourcing and manufacturing, we expect that we will need to initially support manufacturing activities there with production processes at our existing manufacturing facilities, such as Gigafactory 1. Moreover, local manufacturing is critical to our expansion and sales in China, which is the largest market for electric vehicles in the world. Our sales of Model S and Model X in China have been negatively impacted by certain tariffs on automobiles manufactured in the U.S., such as our vehicles, and our costs for producing our vehicles in the U.S. have also been affected by import duties on certain components sourced from China. If we are not able to establish manufacturing activities in China and other jurisdictions to minimize the impact of such unfavorable tariffs, duties or costs, or ramp our production capabilities at Gigafactory 1 or other facilities to support such vehicle manufacturing activities, our ability to compete in such jurisdictions, and our operating results, business and prospects, will be harmed. 
If we are unable to achieve our targeted manufacturing costs for our vehicles, including Model 3, our financial condition and operating results will suffer. 
While we are continuing to and expect in the future to realize cost reductions by both us and our suppliers, there is no guarantee we will be able to achieve sufficient cost savings to reach our gross margin and profitability goals, including for the least expensive variant of Model 3 that we ultimately expect to produce, or our other financial targets. We incur significant costs related to procuring the materials required to manufacture our vehicles, assembling vehicles and compensating our personnel. If our efforts to continue to decrease manufacturing costs are not successful, we may incur substantial costs or cost overruns in utilizing and increasing the production capability of our vehicle manufacturing facilities, such as for Model 3 both in the U.S. and internationally. Many of the factors that impact our manufacturing costs are beyond our control, such as potential increases in the costs of our materials and components, such as lithium, nickel and other components of our battery cells or aluminum used to produce body panels. If we are unable to continue to control and reduce our manufacturing costs, our operating results, business and prospects will be harmed. 
21
________________________________________
 
Increases in costs, disruption of supply or shortage of materials, in particular for lithium-ion cells, could harm our business.
We may experience increases in the cost or a sustained interruption in the supply or shortage of materials. Any such increase, supply interruption or shortage could materially and negatively impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. We use various materials in our business including aluminum, steel, lithium, nickel, copper and cobalt, as well as lithium-ion cells from suppliers. The prices for these materials fluctuate, and their available supply may be unstable, depending on market conditions and global demand for these materials, including as a result of increased production of electric vehicles and energy storage products by our competitors, and could adversely affect our business and operating results. For instance, we are exposed to multiple risks relating to lithium-ion cells. These risks include:
 	?an increase in the cost, or decrease in the available supply, of materials used in the cells;
 	?disruption in the supply of cells due to quality issues or recalls by battery cell manufacturers or any issues that may arise with respect to cells manufactured at our own facilities; and
 	?fluctuations in the value of the Japanese yen against the U.S. dollar as our battery-cell purchases for Model S and Model X and some raw materials for cells used in Model 3 and energy storage products are currently denominated in Japanese yen. 
Our business is dependent on the continued supply of battery cells for the battery packs used in our vehicles and energy storage products. While we believe several sources of the battery cells are available for such battery packs, and expect to eventually rely substantially on battery cells manufactured at our own facilities, we have to date fully qualified only a very limited number of suppliers for the cells used in such battery packs and have very limited flexibility in changing cell suppliers. Any disruption in the supply of battery cells from such suppliers could disrupt production of our vehicles and of the battery packs we produce for energy products until such time as a different supplier is fully qualified. Furthermore, fluctuations or shortages in petroleum and other economic conditions may cause us to experience significant increases in freight charges and material costs. Substantial increases in the prices for our materials or prices charged to us, such as those charged by battery cell suppliers, would increase our operating costs, and could reduce our margins if we cannot recoup the increased costs through increased vehicle prices. Any attempts to increase vehicle prices in response to increased material costs could result in cancellations of vehicle orders and reservations and therefore materially and adversely affect our brand, image, business, prospects and operating results.
We may become subject to product liability claims, which could harm our financial condition and liquidity if we are not able to successfully defend or insure against such claims.
Although we design our vehicles to be the safest vehicles on the road, product liability claims, even those without merit, could harm our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. The automobile industry in particular experiences significant product liability claims and we face inherent risk of exposure to claims in the event our vehicles do not perform or are claimed to not have performed as expected. As is true for other automakers, our cars have been involved and we expect in the future will be involved in crashes resulting in death or personal injury, and such crashes where Autopilot is engaged are the subject of significant public attention. We have experienced and we expect to continue to face claims arising from or related to misuse or claimed failures of new technologies that we are pioneering, including Autopilot in our vehicles. Moreover, as our solar energy systems and energy storage products generate and store electricity, they have the potential to cause injury to people or property. A successful product liability claim against us could require us to pay a substantial monetary award. Our risks in this area are particularly pronounced given the relatively limited number of vehicles and energy storage products delivered to date and limited field experience of our products. Moreover, a product liability claim could generate substantial negative publicity about our products and business and could have a material adverse effect on our brand, business, prospects and operating results. In most jurisdictions, we generally self-insure against the risk of product liability claims for vehicle exposure, meaning that any product liability claims will likely have to be paid from company funds, not by insurance. 
22
________________________________________
 
The markets in which we operate are highly competitive, and we may not be successful in competing in these industries. We currently face competition from new and established domestic and international competitors and expect to face competition from others in the future, including competition from companies with new technology. 
The worldwide automotive market, particularly for alternative fuel vehicles, is highly competitive today and we expect it will become even more so in the future. There is no assurance that our vehicles will be successful in the respective markets in which they compete. A significant and growing number of established and new automobile manufacturers, as well as other companies, have entered or are reported to have plans to enter the alternative fuel vehicle market, including hybrid, plug-in hybrid and fully electric vehicles, as well as the market for self-driving technology and applications. In some cases, such competitors have announced an intention to produce electric vehicles exclusively at some point in the future. Most of our current and potential competitors have significantly greater financial, technical, manufacturing, marketing, vehicle sales resources and networks than we do and may be able to devote greater resources to the design, development, manufacturing, distribution, promotion, sale and support of their products.  In particular, some competitors have also announced plans to compete with us in important and large markets for electric vehicles, such as China. Increased competition could result in lower vehicle unit sales, price reductions, revenue shortfalls, loss of customers and loss of market share, which could harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. In addition, our Model 3 vehicle faces competition from existing and future automobile manufacturers in the extremely competitive entry-level premium sedan market, including Audi, BMW, Lexus and Mercedes.
The solar and energy storage industries are highly competitive. We face competition from other manufacturers, developers and installers of solar and energy storage systems, as well as from large utilities. Decreases in the retail prices of electricity from utilities or other renewable energy sources could make our products less attractive to customers and lead to an increased rate of customer defaults under our existing long-term leases and PPAs. Moreover, solar panel and lithium-ion battery prices have declined and are continuing to decline. As we increase our battery and solar manufacturing capabilities, including at Gigafactory 1 and Gigafactory 2, future price declines may harm our ability to produce energy storage systems and solar systems at competitive prices.
If we are unable to establish and maintain confidence in our long-term business prospects among consumers, analysts and within our industries, then our financial condition, operating results, business prospects and stock price may suffer materially.
Consumers may be less likely to purchase our products if they are not convinced that our business will succeed or that our service and support and other operations will continue in the long term. Similarly, suppliers and other third parties will be less likely to invest time and resources in developing business relationships with us if they are not convinced that our business will succeed. Accordingly, in order to build and maintain our business, we must maintain confidence among customers, suppliers, analysts, ratings agencies and other parties in our long-term financial viability and business prospects. Maintaining such confidence may be particularly complicated by certain factors, such as our limited operating history, negative press, customer unfamiliarity with our products, any delays in scaling manufacturing, delivery and service operations to meet demand, competition and uncertainty regarding the future of electric vehicles or our other products and services, our quarterly production and sales performance compared with market expectations, and any other negative publicity related to us. Many of these factors are largely outside our control, and any negative perceptions about our long-term business prospects, even if exaggerated or unfounded, such as speculation regarding the sufficiency or stability of our management team, could harm our business and make it more difficult to raise additional funds if needed.
23
________________________________________
 
Our plan to generate ongoing growth and demand, including by expanding and optimizing our retail, service and vehicle charging operations, will require significant cash investments and management resources and may not meet expectations with respect to additional sales, installations or servicing of our products or availability of public charging solutions. 
We plan to generate ongoing growth and demand, including by globally expanding and optimizing our retail, service and vehicle charging operations. These plans require significant cash investments and management resources and may not meet our expectations with respect to additional sales or installations of our products. This ongoing global expansion, which includes planned entry into markets in which we have limited or no experience selling, delivering, installing and/or servicing our products at scale, and which may pose legal, regulatory, labor, cultural and political challenges that we have not previously encountered, may not have the desired effect of increasing sales and installations and expanding our brand presence to the degree we are anticipating. Furthermore, the increasing number of Tesla vehicles will require us to continue to increase the number of our Supercharger stations and connectors significantly in locations throughout the world. If we fail to do so in a timely manner, our customers could become dissatisfied, which could adversely affect sales of our vehicles. We will also need to ensure we are in compliance with any regulatory requirements applicable to the sale, installation and service of our products, the sale of electricity generated through our solar energy systems and operation of Superchargers in those jurisdictions, which could take considerable time and expense. If we experience any delays or cannot meet customer expectations in expanding our customer infrastructure network, or our expansion plans are not successful in continuing to grow demand, this could lead to a decrease or stagnation in sales or installations of our products and could negatively impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. 
We face risks associated with our global operations and expansion, including unfavorable regulatory, political, economic, tax and labor conditions, and with establishing ourselves in new markets, all of which could harm our business.
We currently have a global footprint, with domestic and international operations and subsidiaries in various countries and jurisdictions, and we continue to expand and optimize our retail, service and Supercharger capabilities internationally. Accordingly, we are subject to a variety of legal, political and regulatory requirements and social and economic conditions over which we have little control. For example, we may be impacted by trade policies, political uncertainty and economic cycles involving geographic regions where we have significant operations. Sales of vehicles in the automotive industry also tend to be cyclical in many markets, which may expose us to increased volatility as we expand and adjust our operations and retail strategies.
We are subject to a number of risks associated in particular with international business activities that may increase our costs, impact our ability to sell our products and require significant management attention. These risks include conforming our products to various international regulatory and safety requirements as well as charging and other electric infrastructures, organizing local operating entities, difficulty in establishing, staffing and managing foreign operations, challenges in attracting customers, foreign government taxes, regulations and permit requirements, our ability to enforce our contractual rights; trade restrictions, customs regulations, tariffs and price or exchange controls, and preferences of foreign nations for domestically manufactured products. For example, in China, which is a key market for us, certain products such as automobiles manufactured in the U.S. have become subject to a recently increased tariff imposed by the government. While such increase has been temporarily suspended, the tariff could remain in place for an undetermined length of time, be further increased in the future and/or lead consumers to postpone or choose another vehicle brand subject to lower tariffs or no tariffs. Moreover, recently increased import duties on certain components used in our products that are sourced from China may increase our costs and negatively impact our operating results.
 
24
________________________________________
 
Our vehicles and energy storage products make use of lithium-ion battery cells, which have been observed to catch fire or vent smoke and flame, and such events have raised concerns, and future events may lead to additional concerns, about the batteries used in automotive applications. 
The battery packs that we produce make use of lithium-ion cells. On rare occasions, lithium-ion cells can rapidly release the energy they contain by venting smoke and flames in a manner that can ignite nearby materials as well as other lithium-ion cells. While we have designed the battery pack to passively contain any single cell抯 release of energy without spreading to neighboring cells, there can be no assurance that a field or testing failure of our vehicles or other battery packs that we produce will not occur, which could subject us to lawsuits, product recalls or redesign efforts, all of which would be time consuming and expensive. Also, negative public perceptions regarding the suitability of lithium-ion cells for automotive applications or any future incident involving lithium-ion cells such as a vehicle or other fire, even if such incident does not involve our vehicles or energy storage products, could seriously harm our business.
In addition, we store a significant number of lithium-ion cells at our facilities and are producing high volumes of cells and battery modules and packs at Gigafactory 1. Any mishandling of battery cells may cause disruption to the operation of our facilities. While we have implemented safety procedures related to the handling of the cells, there can be no assurance that a safety issue or fire related to the cells would not disrupt our operations. Such damage or injury could lead to adverse publicity and potentially a safety recall. Moreover, any failure of a competitor抯 electric vehicle or energy storage product may cause indirect adverse publicity for us and our products. Such adverse publicity could negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. 
If we fail to effectively grow and manage the residual, financing and credit risks related to our vehicle financing programs, our business may suffer.
We offer financing arrangements for our vehicles in North America, Europe and Asia primarily through various financial institutions. We also currently offer Model S and Model X leasing directly through our local subsidiaries in the U.S. and Canada. Under a lease held directly by us, we typically receive only a very small portion of the total vehicle purchase price at the time of lease, followed by a stream of payments over the term of the lease. The profitability of any vehicles returned to us at the end of their leases depends on our ability to accurately project our vehicles?residual values at the outset of the leases, and such values may fluctuate prior to the end of their terms depending on various factors such as supply and demand of our used vehicles, economic cycles and the pricing of new vehicles. The leasing program also relies on our ability to secure adequate financing and/or business partners to fund and grow this program, and screen for and manage customer credit risk. We expect the availability of leasing and other financing options will be important for our vehicle customers. If we are unable to adequately fund our leasing program with internal funds, or partners or other external financing sources, and compelling alternative financing programs are not available for our customers, we may be unable to grow our sales. Furthermore, if our leasing business grows substantially, our business may suffer if we cannot effectively manage the greater levels of residual and credit risks resulting from growth. Finally, if we do not successfully monitor and comply with applicable national, state and/or local financial regulations and consumer protection laws governing lease transactions, we may become subject to enforcement actions or penalties, either of which may harm our business.
Moreover, we have provided resale value guarantees to customers and partners for certain financing programs, under which such counterparties may sell their vehicles back to us at certain points in time at pre-determined amounts. However, actual resale values, as with residual values for leased vehicles, are subject to similar fluctuations over the term of the financing arrangements. If the actual resale values of any vehicles resold or returned to us pursuant to these programs are materially lower than the pre-determined amounts we have offered, our operating results, profitability and/or liquidity could be negatively impacted.
 
25
________________________________________
 
The unavailability, reduction or elimination of, or unfavorable determinations with respect to, government and economic incentives in the U.S. and abroad supporting the development and adoption of electric vehicles, energy storage products or solar energy could have some impact on demand for our products and services. 
We and our customers currently benefit from certain government and economic incentives supporting the development and adoption of electric vehicles. In the U.S. and abroad, such incentives include, among other things, tax credits or rebates that encourage the purchase of electric vehicles. In Norway, for example, the purchase of electric vehicles is not currently subject to import taxes, the 25% value added tax, or the carbon dioxide and weight-based purchase taxes that apply to the purchase of gas-powered vehicles. Notably, the quantum of incentive programs promoting electric vehicles is a tiny fraction of the amount of subsidies that are provided to gas-powered vehicles through the oil and gas industries. Nevertheless, even the limited benefits from such programs could be reduced, eliminated or exhausted. For example, under current regulations, a $7,500 federal tax credit that was available in the U.S. for the purchase of our vehicles is being reduced in phases during, and will sunset at the end of, 2019. We believe the first reduction in this tax credit may have pulled forward some near-term demand in the U.S. into 2018, and could create similar pull-forwards in 2019 before each further step reduction in the federal tax credit. Moreover, in July 2018, a previously available incentive for purchases of Model 3 in Ontario, Canada was cancelled and Tesla buyers in Germany lost access to electric vehicle incentives for a short period of time beginning late 2017. In April 2017 and January 2016, respectively, previously available incentives in Hong Kong and Denmark that favored the purchase of electric vehicles expired, negatively impacting sales. Effective March 2016, California implemented regulations phasing out a $2,500 cash rebate on qualified electric vehicles for high-income consumers. Such developments could have some negative impact on demand for our vehicles, and we and our customers may have to adjust to them.
In addition, certain governmental rebates, tax credits and other financial incentives that are currently available with respect to our solar and energy storage product businesses allow us to lower our installation costs and cost of capital and encourage customers to buy our products and investors to invest in our solar financing funds. However, these incentives may expire on a particular date when the allocated funding is exhausted, reduced or terminated as renewable energy adoption rates increase, often without warning. For example, the U.S. federal government currently offers a 30% ITC for the installation of solar power facilities and energy storage systems that are charged from a co-sited solar power facility. The ITC is currently scheduled to decline in phases, ultimately to 10% for commercial and utility systems and to 0% for customer-owned residential systems by January 2022. Likewise, in jurisdictions where net energy metering is currently available, our customers receive bill credits from utilities for energy that their solar energy systems generate and export to the grid in excess of the electric load they use. Several jurisdictions have reduced or eliminated the benefit available under net energy metering, or have proposed to do so. Such reductions in or termination of governmental incentives could adversely impact our results by making our products less competitive for potential customers, increasing our cost of capital and adversely impacting our ability to attract investment partners and to form new financing funds for our solar and energy storage assets. Additionally, the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in the U.S. could potentially increase the cost, and decrease the availability, of renewable energy financing, by reducing the value of depreciation benefits associated with, and the overall investor tax capacity needed to monetize, renewable energy projects. Such changes could lower the overall investment willingness and capacity for such projects available in the market.
Moreover, we and our fund investors claim the ITC and certain state incentives in amounts based on the fair market value of our solar and energy storage systems. Although we obtain independent appraisals to support the claimed fair market values, the relevant governmental authorities have audited such values and in certain cases have determined that they should be lower, and they may do so again in the future. Such determinations may result in adverse tax consequences and/or our obligation to make indemnification or other payments to our funds or fund investors.
26
________________________________________
 
Any failure by us to realize the expected benefits of our substantial investments and commitments with respect to the manufacture of PV cells and modules, including if we are unable to comply with the terms of our agreement with the Research Foundation for the State University of New York relating to our Gigafactory 2, could result in negative consequences for our business.
We own certain PV cell and module manufacturing and technology assets, and a build-to-suit lease arrangement with the Research Foundation for the State University of New York (the 揝UNY Foundation?. This agreement with the SUNY Foundation provides for the construction of Gigafactory 2 in Buffalo, New York with the intended capacity to produce at least 1.0 GW of solar products annually. Under this agreement, we are obligated to, among other things, employ specified minimum numbers of personnel in the State of New York and spend or incur $5.0 billion in combined capital, operational expenses, costs of goods sold and other costs in the State of New York during the 10-year period following the completion of all construction and related infrastructure, the arrival of manufacturing equipment, and the receipt of certain permits and other specified items at Gigafactory 2. If we fail in any year over the course of the term of the agreement to meet these obligations, we would be obligated to pay a 損rogram payment?of $41.2 million to the SUNY Foundation in such year. Any inability on our part to comply with the requirements of this agreement may result in the payment of significant amounts to the SUNY Foundation, the termination of our lease at Gigafactory 2, and/or the need to secure an alternative supply of PV cells and modules for our solar products. Moreover, if we are unable to utilize our manufacturing and technology assets in accordance with our expectations, we may have to recognize accounting charges pertaining to the write-off of such assets. Any of the foregoing events could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results.
If we are unable to attract and/or retain key employees and hire qualified personnel, our ability to compete could be harmed.
The loss of the services of any of our key employees could disrupt our operations, delay the development and introduction of our vehicles and services, and negatively impact our business, prospects and operating results. In particular, we are highly dependent on the services of Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer, and Jeffrey B. Straubel, our Chief Technology Officer. 
None of our key employees is bound by an employment agreement for any specific term and we may not be able to successfully attract and retain senior leadership necessary to grow our business. Our future success depends upon our ability to attract and retain executive officers and other key technology, sales, marketing, engineering, manufacturing and support personnel, especially to support our high-volume manufacture of vehicles and expansion plans, and any failure or delay in doing so could adversely impact our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. 
Key talent may leave Tesla due to various factors, such as a very competitive labor market for talented individuals with automotive or technology experience, or any negative publicity related to us. In California, Nevada and other regions where we have operations, there is increasing competition for individuals with skillsets needed for our business, including specialized knowledge of electric vehicles, software engineering, manufacturing engineering, and other skills such as electrical and building construction expertise. This competition affects both our ability to retain key employees and hire new ones. Moreover, we have in the past conducted reductions in force in order to optimize our organizational structure and reduce costs, and certain senior personnel have also departed for various reasons. Our continued success depends upon our continued ability to hire new employees in a timely manner, especially to support our expansion plans, and to retain current employees or replace departed senior employees with qualified and experienced individuals, which is typically a time-consuming process. Additionally, we compete with both mature and prosperous companies that have far greater financial resources than we do and start-ups and emerging companies that promise short-term growth opportunities. Difficulties in retaining current employees or recruiting new ones could have an adverse effect on our performance and results.
27
________________________________________
 
Finally, our compensation philosophy for all of our personnel reflects our startup origins, with an emphasis on equity-based awards and benefits in order to closely align their incentives with the long-term interests of our stockholders. Each of our current equity incentive plan and employee stock purchase plan provides for an 揺vergreen?provision that permits our board of directors to increase on an annual basis, subject to specified limits, the number of equity-based awards that may be granted to, and shares of our common stock that may be purchased by, our personnel thereunder. These plans are currently scheduled to expire in December 2019, and we will need to extend them or establish new plans in order to continue to compensate our employees following their expiration, which will require the approval of our stockholders. Moreover, there is no assurance that these plans as extended or any future plans will contain evergreen provisions, which would mean that we would have to periodically seek and obtain approval from our stockholders for future increases to the number of awards that may be granted and shares that may be purchased under such plans. If we are unable to obtain such stockholder approvals and compensate our personnel in accordance with our compensation philosophy, our ability to retain and hire qualified personnel would be negatively impacted.
We are highly dependent on the services of Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer.
We are highly dependent on the services of Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer and largest stockholder. Although Mr. Musk spends significant time with Tesla and is highly active in our management, he does not devote his full time and attention to Tesla. Mr. Musk also currently serves as Chief Executive Officer and Chief Technical Officer of Space Exploration Technologies Corp., a developer and manufacturer of space launch vehicles, and is involved in other emerging technology ventures.
We are continuously expanding and improving our information technology systems and use security measures designed to protect our systems against breaches and cyber-attacks. If these efforts are not successful, our business and operations could be disrupted and our operating results and reputation could be harmed. 
We are continuously expanding and improving our information technology systems, including implementing new internally developed systems, to assist us in the management of our business. In particular, our volume production of multiple vehicles necessitates continued development, maintenance and improvement of our information technology systems in the U.S. and abroad, which include product data management, procurement, inventory management, production planning and execution, sales, service and logistics, dealer management, financial, tax and regulatory compliance systems. We also maintain information technology measures designed to protect us against intellectual property theft, data breaches and other cyber-attacks. The implementation, maintenance and improvement of these systems require significant management time, support and cost. Moreover, there are inherent risks associated with developing, improving and expanding our core systems as well as implementing new systems, including the disruption of our data management, procurement, manufacturing execution, finance, supply chain and sales and service processes. These risks may affect our ability to manage our data and inventory, procure parts or supplies or manufacture, sell, deliver and service vehicles, or achieve and maintain compliance with, or realize available benefits under, tax laws and other applicable regulations. 
We cannot be sure that these systems or their required functionality will be effectively implemented, maintained or expanded as planned. If we do not successfully implement, maintain or expand these systems as planned, our operations may be disrupted, our ability to accurately and/or timely report our financial results could be impaired, and deficiencies may arise in our internal control over financial reporting, which may impact our ability to certify our financial results. Moreover, our proprietary information could be compromised or misappropriated and our reputation may be adversely affected. If these systems or their functionality do not operate as we expect them to, we may be required to expend significant resources to make corrections or find alternative sources for performing these functions.
28
________________________________________
 
Any unauthorized control or manipulation of our products?systems could result in loss of confidence in us and our products and harm our business.
Our products contain complex information technology systems. For example, our vehicles and energy storage products are designed with built-in data connectivity to accept and install periodic remote updates from us to improve or update their functionality. We have designed, implemented and tested security measures intended to prevent unauthorized access to our information technology networks, our products and their systems. However, hackers have reportedly attempted, and may attempt in the future, to gain unauthorized access to modify, alter and use such networks, products and systems to gain control of, or to change, our products?functionality, user interface and performance characteristics, or to gain access to data stored in or generated by our products. We encourage reporting of potential vulnerabilities in the security of our products via our security vulnerability reporting policy, and we aim to remedy any reported and verified vulnerability. Accordingly, we have received reports of potential vulnerabilities in the past and have attempted to remedy them. However, there can be no assurance that vulnerabilities will not be exploited in the future before they can be identified, or that our remediation efforts are or will be successful.
Any unauthorized access to or control of our products or their systems or any loss of data could result in legal claims or proceedings. In addition, regardless of their veracity, reports of unauthorized access to our products, their systems or data, as well as other factors that may result in the perception that our products, their systems or data are capable of being 揾acked,?could negatively affect our brand and harm our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results. We have been the subject of such reports in the past.
We are subject to various environmental and safety laws and regulations that could impose substantial costs upon us and negatively impact our ability to operate our manufacturing facilities. 
As a manufacturing company, including with respect to facilities such as the Tesla Factory, Gigafactory 1 and Gigafactory 2, we are subject to complex environmental, health and safety laws and regulations at numerous jurisdictional levels in the U.S. and abroad, including laws relating to the use, handling, storage, disposal and human exposure to hazardous materials. The costs of compliance, including remediating contamination if any is found on our properties and any changes to our operations mandated by new or amended laws, may be significant. We may also face unexpected delays in obtaining permits and approvals required by such laws in connection with our manufacturing facilities, which would hinder our operation of these facilities. Such costs and delays may adversely impact our business prospects and operating results. Furthermore, any violations of these laws may result in substantial fines and penalties, remediation costs, third party damages, or a suspension or cessation of our operations.
Our business may be adversely affected by any disruptions caused by union activities. 
It is common for employees at companies with significant manufacturing operations such as us to belong to a union, which can result in higher employee costs and increased risk of work stoppages. Moreover, regulations in some jurisdictions outside of the U.S. mandate employee participation in industrial collective bargaining agreements and work councils with certain consultation rights with respect to the relevant companies?operations. Although we work diligently to provide the best possible work environment for our employees, they may still decide to join or seek recognition to form a labor union, or we may be required to become a union signatory. The United Automobile Workers (揢AW? has been engaged in a campaign to organize manufacturing operations at Tesla. As part of that campaign, the UAW has filed with the National Labor Relations Board (揘LRB? a series of unfair labor practice charges against Tesla on which a hearing recently concluded. We cannot predict the timing of the NLRB抯 decision, and an unfavorable outcome for Tesla may have a negative impact on the perception of Tesla抯 treatment of our employees. Furthermore, we are directly or indirectly dependent upon companies with unionized work forces, such as parts suppliers and trucking and freight companies, and work stoppages or strikes organized by such unions could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition or operating results. If a work stoppage occurs, it could delay the manufacture and sale of our products and have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, operating results or financial condition.
29
________________________________________
 
Our products and services are subject to substantial regulations, which are evolving, and unfavorable changes or failure by us to comply with these regulations could substantially harm our business and operating results. 
Motor vehicles are subject to substantial regulation under international, federal, state and local laws. We incur significant costs in complying with these regulations and may be required to incur additional costs to comply with any changes to such regulations, and any failures to comply could result in significant expenses, delays or fines. We are subject to laws and regulations applicable to the supply, manufacture, import, sale and service of automobiles internationally. For example, in countries outside of the U.S., we are required to meet standards relating to vehicle safety, fuel economy and emissions, among other things, that are often materially different from requirements in the U.S., thus resulting in additional investment into the vehicles and systems to ensure regulatory compliance in those countries. This process may include official review and certification of our vehicles by foreign regulatory agencies prior to market entry, as well as compliance with foreign reporting and recall management systems requirements.
Additionally, our vehicles are equipped with a suite of driver-assistance features called Autopilot, which help assist drivers with certain tedious and potentially dangerous aspects of road travel, but require drivers to remain engaged. There is a variety of international, federal and state regulations that may apply to self-driving vehicles, which include many existing vehicle standards that were not originally intended to apply to vehicles that may not have a driver. Such regulations continue to rapidly change, which increases the likelihood of a patchwork of complex or conflicting regulations, or may delay products or restrict self-driving features and availability, any of which could adversely affect our business.
Moreover, as a manufacturer and installer of solar generation and energy storage systems and a supplier of electricity generated and stored by the solar energy and energy storage systems we install for customers, we are impacted by federal, state and local regulations and policies concerning electricity pricing, the interconnection of electricity generation and storage equipment with the electric grid, and the sale of electricity generated by third-party owned systems. For example, existing or proposed regulations and policies would permit utilities to limit the amount of electricity generated by our customers with their solar energy systems, charge fees and penalties to our customers relating to the purchase of energy other than from the grid, adjust electricity rate designs such that the price of our solar products may not be competitive with that of electricity from the grid, restrict us and our customers from transacting under our PPAs or qualifying for government incentives and benefits that apply to solar power, and limit or eliminate net energy metering. If such regulations and policies remain in effect or are adopted in other jurisdictions, or if other regulations and policies that adversely impact the interconnection or use of our solar and energy storage systems are introduced, they could deter potential customers from purchasing our solar and energy storage products, threaten the economics of our existing contracts and cause us to cease solar and energy storage system sales and operations in the relevant jurisdictions, which could harm our business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations.
Failure to comply with various privacy and consumer protection laws to which we are subject could harm the Company. 
Our privacy policy is posted on our website, and any failure by us or our vendor or other business partners to comply with it or with federal, state or international privacy, data protection or security laws or regulations could result in regulatory or litigation-related actions against us, legal liability, fines, damages and other costs. Substantial expenses and operational changes may be required in connection with maintaining compliance with such laws, and in particular certain emerging privacy laws are still subject to a high degree of uncertainty as to their interpretation and application. For example, in May 2018, the General Data Protection Regulation (the 揋DPR? began to fully apply to the processing of personal information collected from individuals located in the European Union. The GDPR has created new compliance obligations and has significantly increased fines for noncompliance. Although we take steps to protect the security of our customers?personal information, we may be required to expend significant resources to comply with data breach requirements if third parties improperly obtain and use the personal information of our customers or we otherwise experience a data loss with respect to customers?personal information. A major breach of our network security and systems could have negative consequences for our business and future prospects, including possible fines, penalties and damages, reduced customer demand for our vehicles and harm to our reputation and brand.
30
________________________________________
 
We may choose to or be compelled to undertake product recalls or take other similar actions, which could adversely affect our brand image and financial performance. 
Any product recall with respect to our products may result in adverse publicity, damage our brand and adversely affect our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition. For example, certain vehicle recalls that we initiated have resulted from various causes, including a component that could prevent the parking brake from releasing once engaged, a concern with the firmware in the restraints control module in certain right-hand-drive vehicles, industry-wide issues with airbags from a particular supplier, Model X seat components that could cause unintended seat movement during a collision, and concerns of corrosion in Model S power steering assist motor bolts. Furthermore, testing of our products by government regulators or industry groups may require us to initiate product recalls or may result in negative public perceptions about the safety of our products. In the future, we may at various times, voluntarily or involuntarily, initiate a recall if any of our products or our electric vehicle powertrain components that we have provided to other vehicle OEMs, including any systems or parts sourced from our suppliers, prove to be defective or noncompliant with applicable laws and regulations, such as federal motor vehicle safety standards. Such recalls, whether voluntary or involuntary or caused by systems or components engineered or manufactured by us or our suppliers, could involve significant expense and could adversely affect our brand image in our target markets, as well as our business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations.
Our current and future warranty reserves may be insufficient to cover future warranty claims which could adversely affect our financial performance. 
Subject to separate limited warranties for the supplemental restraint system, battery and drive unit, we provide four-year or 50,000-mile limited warranties for the purchasers of new Model 3, Model S and Model X vehicles and either a four-year or 50,000-mile limited warranty or a two-year or 100,000-mile maximum odometer limited warranty for the purchasers of used Model S or Model X vehicles certified and sold by us. The limited warranty for the battery and drive unit for new Model S and Model X vehicles covers the drive unit for eight years, as well as the battery for a period of eight years (or for certain older vehicles, 125,000 miles if reached sooner than eight years), although the battery抯 charging capacity is not covered under any of our warranties or Extended Service plans; the limited warranty for used Model S and Model X vehicles does not extend or otherwise alter the terms of the original battery and drive unit limited warranty for such used vehicles specified in their original New Vehicle Limited Warranty. For the battery and drive unit on our current new Model 3 vehicles, we offer an eight-year or 100,000-mile limited warranty for our standard or mid-range battery and an eight-year or 120,000-mile limited warranty for our long-range battery, with minimum 70% retention of battery capacity over the warranty period. In addition, customers of new Model S and Model X vehicles have the opportunity to purchase an Extended Service plan for the period after the end of the limited warranty for their new vehicles to cover additional services for up to an additional four years or 50,000 miles. 
For energy storage products, we provide limited warranties against defects and to guarantee minimum energy retention levels. For example, we currently guarantee that each Powerwall 2 product will maintain at least 70 or 80% (depending on the region of installation) of its stated energy capacity after 10 years, and that each Powerpack 2 product will retain specified minimum energy capacities in each of its first 15 years of use. For our Solar Roof, we currently offer a warranty on the glass tiles for the lifetime of a customer抯 home and a separate warranty for the energy generation capability of the solar tiles. We also offer extended warranties, availability guarantees and capacity guarantees for periods of up to 20 years at an additional cost at the time of purchase, as well as workmanship warranties to customers who elect to have us install their systems.
Finally, customers who lease solar energy system leases or buy energy from us under PPAs are covered by warranties equal to the length of the agreement term, which is typically 20 years. Systems purchased for cash are covered by a workmanship warranty of up to 20 years. In addition, we pass through to our customers the inverter and panel manufacturers?warranties, which generally range from 10 to 25 years. Finally, we provide a performance guarantee with our leased solar energy systems that compensates a customer on an annual basis if their system does not meet the electricity production guarantees set forth in their lease.  Under these performance guarantees, we bear the risk of production shortfalls resulting from an inverter or panel failure.  These risks are exacerbated in the event the panel or inverter manufacturers cease operations or fail to honor their warranties.
31
________________________________________
 
If our warranty reserves are inadequate to cover future warranty claims on our products, our business, prospects, financial condition and operating results could be materially and adversely affected. Warranty reserves include our management抯 best estimate of the projected costs to repair or to replace items under warranty. These estimates are based on actual claims incurred to-date and an estimate of the nature, frequency and costs of future claims. Such estimates are inherently uncertain and changes to our historical or projected experience, especially with respect to products such as Model 3 and Solar Roof that we have recently introduced and/or that we expect to produce at significantly greater volumes than our past products, may cause material changes to our warranty reserves in the future. 
Our insurance strategy may not be adequate to protect us from all business risks.
We may be subject, in the ordinary course of business, to losses resulting from products liability, accidents, acts of God and other claims against us, for which we may have no insurance coverage. As a general matter, we do not maintain as much insurance coverage as many other companies do, and in some cases, we do not maintain any at all. Additionally, the policies that we do have may include significant deductibles or self-insured retentions, and we cannot be certain that our insurance coverage will be sufficient to cover all future losses or claims against us. A loss that is uninsured or which exceeds policy limits may require us to pay substantial amounts, which could adversely affect our financial condition and operating results.
Our financial results may vary significantly from period-to-period due to fluctuations in our operating costs and other factors.
We expect our period-to-period financial results to vary based on our operating costs, which we anticipate will fluctuate as the pace at which we continue to design, develop and manufacture new products and increase production capacity by expanding our current manufacturing facilities and adding future facilities such as Gigafactory Shanghai may not be consistent or linear between periods. Additionally, our revenues from period-to-period may fluctuate as we introduce existing products to new markets for the first time and as we develop and introduce new products.  As a result of these factors, we believe that quarter-to-quarter comparisons of our financial results, especially in the short term, are not necessarily meaningful and that these comparisons cannot be relied upon as indicators of future performance. Moreover, our financial results may not meet expectations of equity research analysts, ratings agencies or investors, who may be focused only on quarterly financial results. If any of this occurs, the trading price of our stock could fall substantially, either suddenly or over time.
Servicing our indebtedness requires a significant amount of cash, and there is no guarantee that we will have sufficient cash flow from our business to pay our substantial indebtedness.
As of December 31, 2018, we and our subsidiaries had outstanding $11.00 billion in aggregate principal amount of indebtedness (see Note 13, Long-Term Debt Obligations, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Our substantial consolidated indebtedness may increase our vulnerability to any generally adverse economic and industry conditions. We and our subsidiaries may, subject to the limitations in the terms of our existing and future indebtedness, incur additional debt, secure existing or future debt or recapitalize our debt.
Pursuant to their terms, holders of our 0.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2019, 1.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2021 and 2.375% Convertible Senior Notes due 2022 (collectively, the 揟esla Convertible Notes? may convert their respective Tesla Convertible Notes at their option prior to the scheduled maturities of the respective Tesla Convertible Notes under certain circumstances. Upon conversion of the applicable Tesla Convertible Notes, we will be obligated to deliver cash and/or shares in respect of the principal amounts thereof and the conversion value in excess of such principal amounts on such Tesla Convertible Notes. Moreover, our subsidiary抯 1.625% Convertible Senior Notes due 2019 and Zero-Coupon Convertible Senior Notes due 2020 (together, the 揝ubsidiary Convertible Notes? are convertible into shares of our common stock at conversion prices ranging from $300.00 to $759.36 per share. Finally, holders of the Tesla Convertible Notes and the Subsidiary Convertible Notes will have the right to require us to repurchase their notes upon the occurrence of a fundamental change at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the fundamental change purchase date.
32
________________________________________
 
Our ability to make scheduled payments of the principal and interest on our indebtedness when due or to make payments upon conversion or repurchase demands with respect to our convertible notes, or to refinance our indebtedness as we may need or desire, depends on our future performance, which is subject to economic, financial, competitive and other factors beyond our control. Our business may not continue to generate cash flow from operations in the future sufficient to satisfy our obligations under our existing indebtedness, and any future indebtedness we may incur, and to make necessary capital expenditures. If we are unable to generate such cash flow, we may be required to adopt one or more alternatives, such as reducing or delaying investments or capital expenditures, selling assets, refinancing or obtaining additional equity capital on terms that may be onerous or highly dilutive. Our ability to refinance existing or future indebtedness will depend on the capital markets and our financial condition at such time. In addition, our ability to make payments may be limited by law, by regulatory authority or by agreements governing our future indebtedness. We may not be able to engage in any of these activities or engage in these activities on desirable terms or at all, which could result in a default on our existing or future indebtedness and have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. 
Our debt agreements contain covenant restrictions that may limit our ability to operate our business. 
The terms of certain of our credit facilities, including our senior secured asset based revolving credit agreement, contain, and any of our other future debt agreements may contain, covenant restrictions that limit our ability to operate our business, including restrictions on our ability to, among other things, incur additional debt or issue guarantees, create liens, repurchase stock or make other restricted payments, and make certain voluntary prepayments of specified debt. In addition, under certain circumstances we are required to comply with a fixed charge coverage ratio. As a result of these covenants, our ability to respond to changes in business and economic conditions and engage in beneficial transactions, including to obtain additional financing as needed, may be restricted. Furthermore, our failure to comply with our debt covenants could result in a default under our debt agreements, which could permit the holders to accelerate our obligation to repay the debt. If any of our debt is accelerated, we may not have sufficient funds available to repay it. 
We may need or want to raise additional funds and these funds may not be available to us when we need them. If we cannot raise additional funds when we need or want them, our operations and prospects could be negatively affected.
The design, manufacture, sale, installation and/or servicing of automobiles, energy storage products and solar products is a capital intensive business, and the specific timing of cash inflows and outflows may fluctuate substantially from period to period. Until we are consistently generating positive free cash flows, we may need or want to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity, equity-related or debt securities or through obtaining credit from financial institutions to fund, together with our principal sources of liquidity, the costs of developing and manufacturing our current or future vehicles, energy storage products and/or solar products, to pay any significant unplanned or accelerated expenses or for new significant strategic investments, or to refinance our significant consolidated indebtedness, even if not required to do so by the terms of such indebtedness. We need sufficient capital to fund our ongoing operations, ramp vehicle production, continue research and development projects, establish sales, delivery and service centers, build and deploy Superchargers, expand Gigafactory 1, ramp production at Gigafactory 2, build and commence Model 3 production at Gigafactory Shanghai and to make the investments in tooling and manufacturing capital required to introduce new vehicles, energy storage products and solar products. We cannot be certain that additional funds will be available to us on favorable terms when required, or at all. If we cannot raise additional funds when we need them, our financial condition, results of operations, business and prospects could be materially and adversely affected.
33
________________________________________
 
Additionally, we use capital from third-party investors to enable our customers?access to our solar energy systems with little or no upfront cost. The availability of this financing depends upon many factors, including the confidence of the investors in the solar energy industry, the quality and mix of our customer contracts, any regulatory changes impacting the economics of our existing customer contracts, changes in law (including tax law), risks or government incentives associated with these financings, and our ability to compete with other renewable energy companies for the limited number of potential investors. Moreover, while interest rates remain at low levels, they have risen in recent periods. If the rate of return required by investors rises as a result of a rise in interest rates, it will reduce the present value of the customer payment streams underlying, and therefore the total value of, our financing structures, increasing our cost of capital. If we are unable to establish new financing funds on favorable terms for third-party ownership arrangements, we may be unable to finance the installation of our solar energy systems for our lease or PPA customers?systems, or our cost of capital could increase and our liquidity may be negatively impacted, which would have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. 
We could be subject to liability, penalties and other restrictive sanctions and adverse consequences arising out of certain governmental investigations and proceedings.
We are cooperating with certain government investigations as discussed in Note 17, Commitments and Contingencies, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Aside from the settlement with the SEC discussed below relating to Elon Musk抯 statement that he was considering taking Tesla private, to our knowledge no government agency in any ongoing investigation has concluded that any wrongdoing occurred. However, we cannot predict the outcome or impact of any ongoing matters, and there exists the possibility that we could be subject to liability, penalties and other restrictive sanctions and adverse consequences if the SEC, the DOJ, or any other government agency were to pursue legal action in the future. Moreover, we expect to incur costs in responding to related requests for information and subpoenas, and if instituted, in defending against any governmental proceedings.
For example, on October 16, 2018, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York entered a final judgment approving the terms of a settlement filed with the Court on September 29, 2018, in connection with the actions taken by the SEC relating to Mr. Musk抯 statement on August 7, 2018 that he was considering taking Tesla private. Pursuant to the settlement, we, among other things, paid a civil penalty of $20 million, appointed an independent director as the Chair of the Board, appointed two additional independent directors to the Board, and made further enhancements to our disclosure controls and other corporate governance-related matters. Although we intend to continue to comply with the terms and requirements of the settlement, if there is a lack of compliance, additional enforcement actions or other legal proceedings may be instituted against us. 
If we update or discontinue the use of our manufacturing equipment more quickly than expected, we may have to shorten the useful lives of any equipment to be retired as a result of any such update, and the resulting acceleration in our depreciation could negatively affect our financial results.
We have invested and expect to continue to invest significantly in what we believe is state of the art tooling, machinery and other manufacturing equipment for our various product lines, and we depreciate the cost of such equipment over their expected useful lives. However, manufacturing technology may evolve rapidly, and we may decide to update our manufacturing process with cutting-edge equipment more quickly than expected. Moreover, we are continually implementing learnings as our engineering and manufacturing expertise and efficiency increase, which may result in our ability to manufacture our products using less of our currently installed equipment. Alternatively, as we ramp production of Model 3 to higher levels, our learnings may cause us to discontinue the use of already installed equipment in favor of different or additional equipment. The useful life of any equipment that would be retired early as a result would be shortened, causing the depreciation on such equipment to be accelerated, and our results of operations could be negatively impacted. 
34
________________________________________
 
We are exposed to fluctuations in currency exchange rates, which could negatively affect our financial results.
Our revenues and costs denominated in foreign currencies are not completely matched. As we have increased vehicle deliveries in markets outside of the U.S., we have much higher revenues than costs denominated in other currencies such as the euro, Canadian dollar, Chinese yuan and Norwegian krone. Any strengthening of the U.S. dollar would tend to reduce our revenues as measured in U.S. dollars, as we have historically experienced. In addition, a portion of our costs and expenses have been, and we anticipate will continue to be, denominated in foreign currencies, including the Japanese yen. If we do not have fully offsetting revenues in these currencies and if the value of the U.S. dollar depreciates significantly against these currencies, our costs as measured in U.S. dollars as a percent of our revenues will correspondingly increase and our margins will suffer. Moreover, while we undertake limited hedging activities intended to offset the impact of currency translation exposure, it is impossible to predict or eliminate such impact. As a result, our operating results could be adversely affected.
We may face regulatory limitations on our ability to sell vehicles directly which could materially and adversely affect our ability to sell our electric vehicles.
We sell our vehicles directly to consumers using means that we believe will maximize our reach, currently including through our website and our own stores. While we intend to continue to leverage our most effective sales strategies, we may not be able to sell our vehicles through our own stores in each state in the U.S., as some states have laws that may be interpreted to impose limitations on this direct-to-consumer sales model. In certain states in which we are not able to obtain dealer licenses, we have opened galleries, which are not full sales locations.
The application of these state laws to our operations continues to be difficult to predict. Laws in some states have limited our ability to obtain dealer licenses from state motor vehicle regulators and may continue to do so.
In addition, decisions by regulators permitting us to sell vehicles may be challenged by dealer associations and others as to whether such decisions comply with applicable state motor vehicle industry laws. We have prevailed in many of these lawsuits and such results have reinforced our continuing belief that state laws were not designed to prevent our distribution model. In some states, there have also been regulatory and legislative efforts by dealer associations to propose laws that, if enacted, would prevent us from obtaining dealer licenses in their states given our current sales model. A few states have passed legislation that clarifies our ability to operate, but at the same time limits the number of dealer licenses we can obtain or stores that we can operate. We have also filed a lawsuit in federal court in Michigan challenging the constitutionality of the state抯 prohibition on direct sales as applied to our business.
Internationally, there may be laws in jurisdictions we have not yet entered or laws we are unaware of in jurisdictions we have entered that may restrict our sales or other business practices. Even for those jurisdictions we have analyzed, the laws in this area can be complex, difficult to interpret and may change over time. Continued regulatory limitations and other obstacles interfering with our ability to sell vehicles directly to consumers could have a negative and material impact our business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations.
We may need to defend ourselves against intellectual property infringement claims, which may be time-consuming and could cause us to incur substantial costs. 
Others, including our competitors, may hold or obtain patents, copyrights, trademarks or other proprietary rights that could prevent, limit or interfere with our ability to make, use, develop, sell or market our products and services, which could make it more difficult for us to operate our business. From time to time, the holders of such intellectual property rights may assert their rights and urge us to take licenses, and/or may bring suits alleging infringement or misappropriation of such rights. We may consider the entering into licensing agreements with respect to such rights, although no assurance can be given that such licenses can be obtained on acceptable terms or that litigation will not occur, and such licenses could significantly increase our operating expenses. In addition, if we are determined to have infringed upon a third party抯 intellectual property rights, we may be required to cease making, selling or incorporating certain components or intellectual property into the goods and services we offer, to pay substantial damages and/or license royalties, to redesign our products and services, and/or to establish and maintain alternative branding for our products and services. In the event that we were required to take one or more such actions, our business, prospects, operating results and financial condition could be materially adversely affected. In addition, any litigation or claims, whether or not valid, could result in substantial costs, negative publicity and diversion of resources and management attention.
35
________________________________________
 
Tesla is a highly-visible public company whose products, business, results of operations, statements and actions are often scrutinized by critics whose influence could negatively impact the perception of our brand and the market value of our common stock.
Tesla is a highly-visible public company whose products, business, results of operations, statements and actions are well-publicized. Such attention includes frequent criticism of us by a range of third-parties. Our continued success depends on our ability to focus on executing on our mission and business plan while maintaining the trust of our current and potential customers, employees, stockholders and business partners. Any negative perceived actions of ours could influence the perception of our brand or our leadership by our customers, suppliers or investors, which could adversely impact our business prospects, operating results and the market value of our common stock.
Our facilities or operations could be damaged or adversely affected as a result of disasters.
Our corporate headquarters, the Tesla Factory and Gigafactory 1 are located in seismically active regions in Northern California and Nevada. If major disasters such as earthquakes or other events occur, or our information system or communications network breaks down or operates improperly, our headquarters and production facilities may be seriously damaged, or we may have to stop or delay production and shipment of our products. We may incur expenses relating to such damages, which could have a material adverse impact on our business, operating results and financial condition.
Risks Related to the Ownership of Our Common Stock
The trading price of our common stock is likely to continue to be volatile.
The trading price of our common stock has been highly volatile and could continue to be subject to wide fluctuations in response to various factors, some of which are beyond our control. Our common stock has experienced an intra-day trading high of $387.46 per share and a low of $244.59 per share over the last 52 weeks. The stock market in general, and the market for technology companies in particular, has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations that have often been unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of those companies. In particular, a large proportion of our common stock has been and may continue to be traded by short sellers which may put pressure on the supply and demand for our common stock, further influencing volatility in its market price. Public perception and other factors outside of our control may additionally impact the stock price of companies like us that garner a disproportionate degree of public attention, regardless of actual operating performance. In addition, in the past, following periods of volatility in the overall market and the market price of a particular company抯 securities, securities class action litigation has often been instituted against these companies. Moreover, stockholder litigation like this has been filed against us in the past. While we are continuing to defend such actions vigorously, any judgment against us or any future stockholder litigation could result in substantial costs and a diversion of our management抯 attention and resources.
We may fail to meet our publicly announced guidance or other expectations about our business, which could cause our stock price to decline. 
We provide guidance regarding our expected financial and business performance, such as projections regarding sales and production, as well as anticipated future revenues, gross margins, profitability and cash flows. Correctly identifying key factors affecting business conditions and predicting future events is inherently an uncertain process and our guidance may not ultimately be accurate. Our guidance is based on certain assumptions such as those relating to anticipated production and sales volumes (which generally are not linear throughout a given period), average sales prices, supplier and commodity costs, and planned cost reductions. If our guidance is not accurate or varies from actual results due to our inability to meet our assumptions or the impact on our financial performance that could occur as a result of various risks and uncertainties, the market value of our common stock could decline significantly.
36
________________________________________
 
Transactions relating to our convertible notes may dilute the ownership interest of existing stockholders, or may otherwise depress the price of our common stock.
The conversion of some or all of the Tesla Convertible Notes or the Subsidiary Convertible Notes would dilute the ownership interests of existing stockholders to the extent we deliver shares upon conversion of any of such notes. Our Subsidiary Convertible Notes have been historically, and the other Tesla Convertible Notes may become in the future, convertible at the option of their holders prior to their scheduled terms under certain circumstances. If holders elect to convert their convertible notes, we could be required to deliver to them a significant number of shares of our common stock. Any sales in the public market of the common stock issuable upon such conversion could adversely affect prevailing market prices of our common stock. In addition, the existence of the convertible notes may encourage short selling by market participants because the conversion of such notes could be used to satisfy short positions, or anticipated conversion of such notes into shares of our common stock could depress the price of our common stock.
Moreover, in connection with each issuance of the Tesla Convertible Notes, we entered into convertible note hedge transactions, which are expected to reduce the potential dilution and/or offset potential cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount upon conversion of the applicable Tesla Convertible Notes. We also entered into warrant transactions with the hedge counterparties, which could separately have a dilutive effect on our common stock to the extent that the market price per share of our common stock exceeds the applicable strike price of the warrants on the applicable expiration dates. In addition, the hedge counterparties or their affiliates may enter into various transactions with respect to their hedge positions, which could also cause or prevent an increase or a decrease in the market price of our common stock or the convertible notes.
Elon Musk has pledged shares of our common stock to secure certain bank borrowings. If Mr. Musk were forced to sell these shares pursuant to a margin call that he could not avoid or satisfy, such sales could cause our stock price to decline.
Certain banking institutions have made extensions of credit to Elon Musk, our Chief Executive Officer, a portion of which was used to purchase shares of common stock in certain of our public offerings and private placements at the same prices offered to third party participants in such offerings and placements. We are not a party to these loans, which are partially secured by pledges of a portion of the Tesla common stock currently owned by Mr. Musk. If the price of our common stock were to decline substantially and Mr. Musk were unable to avoid or satisfy a margin call with respect to his pledged shares, Mr. Musk may be forced by one or more of the banking institutions to sell shares of Tesla common stock in order to remain within the margin limitations imposed under the terms of his loans. Any such sales could cause the price of our common stock to decline further.
Anti-takeover provisions contained in our governing documents, applicable laws and our convertible notes could impair a takeover attempt.
Our certificate of incorporation and bylaws afford certain rights and powers to our board of directors that could contribute to the delay or prevention of an acquisition that it deems undesirable. We are also subject to Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law and other provisions of Delaware law that limit the ability of stockholders in certain situations to effect certain business combinations. In addition, the terms of our convertible notes require us to repurchase such notes in the event of a fundamental change, including a takeover of our company. Any of the foregoing provisions and terms that has the effect of delaying or deterring a change in control could limit the opportunity for our stockholders to receive a premium for their shares of our common stock, and could also affect the price that some investors are willing to pay for our common stock.

 
 
3.D RISK FACTORS

Industry and Business Risks

The worldwide automotive market is highly competitive.

The worldwide automotive market is highly competitive. Toyota faces intense competition from automotive manufacturers in the markets in which it operates. Although the global economy continues to recover gradually, competition in the automotive industry has further intensified amidst difficult overall market conditions. In addition, competition is likely to further intensify in light of further continuing globalization in the worldwide automotive industry, possibly resulting in industry reorganizations. Factors affecting competition include product quality and features, safety, reliability, fuel economy, the amount of time required for innovation and development, pricing, customer service and financing terms. Increased competition may lead to lower vehicle unit sales, which may result in a further downward price pressure and adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. Toyota’s ability to adequately respond to the recent rapid changes in the automotive market and to maintain its competitiveness will be fundamental to its future success in existing and new markets and to maintain its market share. There can be no assurances that Toyota will be able to compete successfully in the future.

The worldwide automotive industry is highly volatile.

Each of the markets in which Toyota competes has been subject to considerable volatility in demand. Demand for vehicles depends to a large extent on economic, social and political conditions in a given market and the introduction of new vehicles and technologies. As Toyota’s revenues are derived from sales in markets worldwide, economic conditions in such markets are particularly important to Toyota.

Reviewing the general economic environment for the fiscal year ended March 2018, the world economy has continued its moderate recovery due to the global expansion of trade and production and solid domestic demand. The Japanese economy has been on a moderate recovery due to improvements in employment and income conditions. For the automotive industry, although markets have progressed in a steady manner in the developed countries and expanded in China, markets in some resource-rich countries have slowed down.

The changes in demand for automobiles are continuing, and it is unclear how this situation will transition in the future. Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected if the changes in demand for automobiles continues or progresses further. Demand may also be affected by factors directly impacting vehicle price or the cost of purchasing and operating vehicles such as sales and financing incentives, prices of raw materials and parts and components, cost of fuel and governmental regulations (including tariffs, import regulation and other taxes). Volatility in demand may lead to lower vehicle unit sales, which may result in downward price pressure and adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s future success depends on its ability to offer new, innovative and competitively priced products that meet customer demand on a timely basis.

Meeting customer demand by introducing attractive new vehicles and reducing the amount of time required for product development are critical to automotive manufacturers. In particular, it is critical to meet customer demand with respect to quality, safety and reliability. The timely introduction of new vehicle models, at competitive prices, meeting rapidly changing customer preferences and demand is more fundamental to Toyota’s success than ever, as the automotive market is rapidly transforming in light of the changing global economy. There is no assurance, however, that Toyota will adequately and appropriately respond to changing customer preferences and demand with respect to quality, safety, reliability, styling and other features in a timely manner. Even if Toyota succeeds in perceiving customer preferences and demand, there is no assurance that Toyota will be capable of developing and manufacturing new, price competitive products in a timely manner with its available technology, intellectual property, sources of raw materials and parts and components, and production

 

5

Table of Contents
capacity, including cost reduction capacity. Further, there is no assurance that Toyota will be able to implement capital expenditures at the level and times planned by management. Toyota’s inability to develop and offer products that meet customers’ preferences and demand with respect to quality, safety, reliability, styling and other features in a timely manner could result in a lower market share and reduced sales volumes and margins, and may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s ability to market and distribute effectively is an integral part of Toyota’s successful sales.

Toyota’s success in the sale of vehicles depends on its ability to market and distribute effectively based on distribution networks and sales techniques tailored to the needs of its customers. There is no assurance that Toyota will be able to develop sales techniques and distribution networks that effectively adapt to changing customer preferences or changes in the regulatory environment in the major markets in which it operates. Toyota’s inability to maintain well-developed sales techniques and distribution networks may result in decreased sales and market share and may adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s success is significantly impacted by its ability to maintain and develop its brand image.

In the highly competitive automotive industry, it is critical to maintain and develop a brand image. In order to maintain and develop a brand image, it is necessary to further increase customers’ confidence by providing safe, high-quality products that meet customer preferences and demand. If Toyota is unable to effectively maintain and develop its brand image as a result of its inability to provide safe, high-quality products or as a result of the failure to promptly implement safety measures such as recalls when necessary, vehicle unit sales and/or sale prices may decrease, and as a result revenues and profits may not increase as expected or may decrease, adversely affecting its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota relies on suppliers for the provision of certain supplies including parts, components and raw materials

Toyota purchases supplies including parts, components and raw materials from a number of external suppliers located around the world. For some supplies, Toyota relies on a single supplier or a limited number of suppliers, whose replacement with another supplier may be difficult. Inability to obtain supplies from a single or limited source supplier may result in difficulty obtaining supplies and may restrict Toyota’s ability to produce vehicles. Furthermore, even if Toyota were to rely on a large number of suppliers, first-tier suppliers with whom Toyota directly transacts may in turn rely on a single second-tier supplier or limited second-tier suppliers. Toyota’s ability to continue to obtain supplies from its suppliers in a timely and cost-effective manner is subject to a number of factors, some of which are not within Toyota’s control. These factors include the ability of Toyota’s suppliers to provide a continued source of supply, and Toyota’s ability to effectively compete and obtain competitive prices from suppliers. A loss of any single or limited source supplier or inability to obtain supplies from suppliers in a timely and cost-effective manner could lead to increased costs or delays or suspensions in Toyota’s production and deliveries, which could have an adverse effect on Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

The worldwide financial services industry is highly competitive.

The worldwide financial services industry is highly competitive. Increased competition in automobile financing may lead to decreased margins. A decline in Toyota’s vehicle unit sales, an increase in residual value risk due to lower used vehicle prices, an increase in the ratio of credit losses and increased funding costs are additional factors which may impact Toyota’s financial services operations. If Toyota is unable to adequately respond to the changes and competition in automobile financing, Toyota’s financial services operations may adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s operations and vehicles rely on various digital and information technologies.

Toyota depends on various information technology networks and systems, some of which are managed by third parties, to process, transmit and store electronic information, including sensitive data, and to manage or

 

6

Table of Contents
support a variety of business processes and activities, including manufacturing, research and development, supply chain management, sales and accounting. In addition, Toyota’s vehicles may rely on various digital and information technologies, including information service and driving assistance functions. Despite security measures, Toyota’s digital and information technology networks and systems may be vulnerable to damage, disruptions or shutdowns due to attacks by hackers, computer viruses, breaches due to unauthorized use, errors or malfeasance by employees and others who have or gain access to the networks and systems Toyota depends on, service failures or bankruptcy of third parties such as software development or cloud computing vendors, power shortages and outages, and utility failures or other catastrophic events like natural disasters. Such incidents could materially disrupt critical operations, disclose sensitive data, interfere with information services and driving assistance functions in Toyota’s vehicles, and/or give rise to legal claims or proceedings, liability or regulatory penalties under applicable laws, which could have an adverse effect on Toyota’s brand image and its financial condition and results of operations.

Financial Market and Economic Risks

Toyota’s operations are subject to currency and interest rate fluctuations.

Toyota is sensitive to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and is principally exposed to fluctuations in the value of the Japanese yen, the U.S. dollar and the euro and, to a lesser extent, the Australian dollar, the Russian ruble, the Canadian dollar and the British pound. Toyota’s consolidated financial statements, which are presented in Japanese yen, are affected by foreign currency exchange fluctuations through translation risk, and changes in foreign currency exchange rates may also affect the price of products sold and materials purchased by Toyota in foreign currencies through transaction risk. In particular, strengthening of the Japanese yen against the U.S. dollar can have an adverse effect on Toyota’s operating results.

Toyota believes that its use of certain derivative financial instruments including foreign exchange forward contracts and interest rate swaps and increased localized production of its products have reduced, but not eliminated, the effects of interest rate and foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. Nonetheless, a negative impact resulting from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and changes in interest rates may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. For a further discussion of currency and interest rate fluctuations and the use of derivative financial instruments, see “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects — Operating Results — Overview — Currency Fluctuations,” “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk,” and notes 21 and 22 to Toyota’s consolidated financial statements.

High prices of raw materials and strong pressure on Toyota’s suppliers could negatively impact Toyota’s profitability.

Increases in prices for raw materials that Toyota and Toyota’s suppliers use in manufacturing their products or parts and components such as steel, precious metals, non-ferrous alloys including aluminum, and plastic parts, may lead to higher production costs for parts and components. This could, in turn, negatively impact Toyota’s future profitability because Toyota may not be able to pass all those costs on to its customers or require its suppliers to absorb such costs.

A downturn in the financial markets could adversely affect Toyota’s ability to raise capital.

Should the world economy suddenly deteriorate, a number of financial institutions and investors will face difficulties in providing capital to the financial markets at levels corresponding to their own financial capacity, and, as a result, there is a risk that companies may not be able to raise capital under terms that they would expect to receive with their creditworthiness. If Toyota is unable to raise the necessary capital under appropriate conditions on a timely basis, Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected.

 

7

Table of Contents
Regulatory, Legal, Political and Other Risks

The automotive industry is subject to various governmental regulations.

The worldwide automotive industry is subject to various laws and governmental regulations including those related to vehicle safety and environmental matters such as emission levels, fuel economy, noise and pollution. In particular, automotive manufacturers such as Toyota are required to implement safety measures such as recalls for vehicles that do not or may not comply with the safety standards of laws and governmental regulations. In addition, Toyota may, in order to reassure its customers of the safety of Toyota’s vehicles, decide to voluntarily implement recalls or other safety measures even if the vehicle complies with the safety standards of relevant laws and governmental regulations. Many governments also impose tariffs and other trade barriers, taxes and levies, or enact price or exchange controls. Toyota has incurred, and expects to incur in the future, significant costs in complying with these regulations. If Toyota launches products that result in safety measures such as recalls, Toyota may incur various costs including significant costs for free repairs. Furthermore, new legislation or changes in existing legislation may also subject Toyota to additional expenses in the future. If Toyota incurs significant costs related to implementing safety measures or meeting laws and governmental regulations, Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected.

Toyota may become subject to various legal proceedings.

As an automotive manufacturer, Toyota may become subject to legal proceedings in respect of various issues, including product liability and infringement of intellectual property. Toyota may also be subject to legal proceedings brought by its shareholders and governmental proceedings and investigations. Toyota is in fact currently subject to a number of pending legal proceedings and government investigations. A negative outcome in one or more of these pending legal proceedings could adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. For a further discussion of governmental regulations, see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Governmental Regulation, Environmental and Safety Standards” and for legal proceedings, please see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Legal Proceedings.”

Toyota may be adversely affected by natural calamities, political and economic instability, fuel shortages or interruptions in social infrastructure, wars, terrorism and labor strikes.

Toyota is subject to various risks associated with conducting business worldwide. These risks include natural calamities; political and economic instability; fuel shortages; interruption in social infrastructure including energy supply, transportation systems, gas, water, or communication systems resulting from natural hazards or technological hazards; wars; terrorism; labor strikes and work stoppages. Should the major markets in which Toyota purchases materials, parts and components and supplies for the manufacture of Toyota products or in which Toyota’s products are produced, distributed or sold be affected by any of these events, it may result in disruptions and delays in the operations of Toyota’s business. Should significant or prolonged disruptions or delays related to Toyota’s business operations occur, it may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

5.C RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT, PATENTS AND LICENSES

Toyota’s research and development is dedicated to capturing the increasingly diverse and sophisticated market through the development of attractive, affordable, high-quality products for customers worldwide. The intellectual property that R&D generates is a vital management resource that Toyota utilizes and protects to maximize its corporate value. For a more detailed discussion of the company’s research and development objectives and policies, see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Research and Development.”

Toyota’s research and development expenditures were approximately ¥1,064.2 billion in fiscal 2018, ¥1,037.5 billion in fiscal 2017, and ¥1,055.6 billion in fiscal 2016.

Toyota operates a global research and development organization with the primary goal of building automobiles that meet the needs of customers in every region of the world. In Japan, research and development operations are led by Toyota and Toyota Central Research & Development Laboratories, Inc., which works closely with Daihatsu Motor Co., Ltd., Hino Motors, Ltd., Toyota Auto Body Co., Ltd., Toyota Motor East Japan, Inc., and many other Toyota group companies. Overseas, Toyota has a worldwide network of technical centers as well as design and motorsports research and development centers.

Toyota established Toyota Research Institute, Inc. (“TRI”) in January 2016 to accelerate research and development of artificial intelligence technology, which has significant potential to support future industrial technologies. In July 2017, Toyota Research Institute, Inc. invested $100 million to launch a venture capital fund designed to provide financing to startup companies, and is making investments in newly established promising startup companies in the four areas of artificial intelligence, robotics, autonomous mobility, and data and cloud technology.

In Japan, Toyota established a new company, Toyota Research Institute-Advanced Development (“TRI-AD”), in March 2018 to further accelerate its efforts in advanced development for automated driving technology. Its key objectives include creating a smooth software pipeline from research to commercialization, leveraging data-handling capabilities, strengthening collaboration in development within the Toyota group, including TRI, to accelerate development, and recruiting and employing top-level engineers globally, while cultivating and coordinating strong talent within the Toyota group.Toyota’s automotive operations include the design, manufacture, assembly and sale of passenger vehicles, minivans and commercial vehicles such as trucks and related parts and accessories. Toyota’s financial services business consists primarily of providing financing to dealers and their customers for the purchase or lease of Toyota vehicles. Toyota’s financial services business also provides retail installment credit and leasing through the purchase of installment and lease contracts originated by Toyota dealers. Related to Toyota’s automotive operations, Toyota is working towards having all of its vehicles become connected vehicles, creating new value and reforming businesses by utilizing big data obtained from those connected vehicles, and establishing new mobility services. Toyota’s all other operations business segment includes the design and manufacture of prefabricated housing and information technology related businesses including a web portal for automobile information called GAZOO.com, etc.The Worldwide Automotive Market

Toyota estimates that annual worldwide vehicle sales totaled approximately 97 million units in 2017.

Automobile sales are affected by a number of factors including:

 

 	•	 	social, political and economic conditions;
 

 	•	 	introduction of new vehicles and technologies; and
 

 	•	 	costs incurred by customers to purchase and operate automobiles.
These factors can cause consumer demand to vary substantially from year to year in different geographic markets and in individual categories of automobiles.

In fiscal 2018, the U.S. saw steady employment growth as well as enhanced consumer spending, economies in Europe expanded at a solid pace under monetary easing measures, and Japan continued to experience favorable employment environment supporting consumption. In emerging markets, China continued to recover due to economic stimulus measures, which led to stronger growth of the global economy, while consumption in resource-rich countries has also been gradually recovering.

The automotive industry was also impacted by these economic trends. In 2017, with respect to developed countries, the automotive market contracted in the United States from the effect of interest-rate hikes, while on the other hand, it expanded in Europe. In addition, in Japan, demand expanded due primarily to the introduction of new models. The automotive markets in emerging countries, including China, as a whole also expanded.

In the medium- to long-term, Toyota expects the automotive market to continue growing driven principally by growth in China and other emerging markets. Global competition is expected to be severe, as competition in compact and low-price vehicles intensifies, and the pace of technological advancement and development of new products quickens, including in response to a heightened global awareness of the environment and more stringent fuel economy standards.

In 2017, China, North America, Europe and Asia were the world’s largest automotive markets. The share of each market across the globe, which Toyota estimates based on the available automobile sales data in each country and region information, was 30% for China, 22% for North America (21% excluding Mexico and Puerto Rico), 22% for Europe and 10% for Asia. In China, new vehicle sales increased to approximately 29.3 million units. In North America, new vehicle sales decreased from the previous year to approximately 20.9 million units. In Europe, new vehicle sales increased to approximately 20.7 million units. In Asia (including India but excluding Japan and China), new vehicle unit sales increased from the previous year to approximately 10 million units.

The worldwide automotive industry is affected significantly by government regulations aimed at reducing harmful effects on the environment, enhancing vehicle safety and improving fuel economy. These regulations have added to the cost of manufacturing vehicles. Many governments also mandate local procurement of parts and components and impose tariffs and other trade barriers, as well as price or exchange controls as a means of creating jobs, protecting domestic producers or influencing their balance of payments. Changes in regulatory requirements and other government-imposed restrictions can limit or otherwise burden an automaker’s operations. Government laws and regulations can also make it difficult to repatriate profits to an automaker’s home country.

The development of the worldwide automotive market includes the continuing globalization of automotive operations. Manufacturers seek to achieve globalization by localizing the design and manufacture of automobiles and their parts and components in the markets in which they are sold. By expanding production capabilities beyond their home markets, automotive manufacturers are able to reduce their exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates as well as to trade restrictions and tariffs.

 

10

Table of Contents
Over the years, there have been many global business alliances and investments entered into between manufacturers in the global automotive industry. There are various reasons behind these transactions including the need to address excessive global capacity in the production of automobiles, and the need to reduce costs and improve efficiency by increasing the number of automobiles produced using common vehicle platforms and by sharing research and development expenses for environmental and other technology, the desire to expand a company’s global presence through increased size and the desire to expand into particular segments or geographic markets.

Toyota believes that its research and development initiatives, particularly the development of environmentally friendly new vehicle technologies, vehicle safety and information technology, provide it with a strategic advantage.

Toyota’s ability to compete in the global automotive industry will depend in part on Toyota’s successful implementation of its business strategy. This is subject to a number of factors, some of which are not in Toyota’s control. These factors are discussed in “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects” and elsewhere in this annual report.

Toyota Global Vision

In March 2011, Toyota unveiled its “Toyota Global Vision” corporate outline for the future, which serves not only to give direction to Toyota employees around the world, but also to convey such direction to customers and to the public at large. Toyota will work to achieve sustained growth through the realization of the following ideals which are parts of the Vision:

Toyota Global Vision

Toyota will lead the way to the future of mobility, enriching lives around the world with the safest and most responsible ways of moving people.

Through our commitment to quality, constant innovation and respect for the planet, we aim to exceed expectations and be rewarded with a smile.

We will meet challenging goals by engaging the talent and passion of people, who believe there is always a better way.

“The safest and most responsible ways of moving people”

 

 	•	 	Safety is Toyota’s highest priority, and Toyota will continue to provide world-class safety.
 

 	•	 	Toyota will also continue to contribute to environmental quality and to human happiness by using leading environmental technology and by deploying that technology in a growing line of vehicle models. At the same time, Toyota will work through the provision of products, sales and services that exceed customer expectation to offer a rewarding experience for customers.
“Enriching lives around the world”

 

 	•	 	Toyota has been consistently true to its founding spirit of serving society through conscientious manufacturing, and it will continue working in that spirit to contribute to enhance the quality of life wherever it has operations.
 

 	•	 	Toyota will strive to continue contributing to economic vitality wherever it has operations by generating stable employment and by participating in mutually beneficial business relationships with dealers and suppliers. It will also strive to continue to actively engage in initiatives for human resources development and the promotion of cultural activities of its host communities.
 

11

Table of Contents
“Lead the way to the future of mobility”

 

 	•	 	Toyota will lead the industry in technological development that will spawn next-generation mobility. For example, it will explore possibilities in personal mobility and in the convergence of information technology for automobiles and “smart grids” for optimizing energy generation and consumption. Toyota will strive to offer products and services that match the needs in each market.
 

 	•	 	Toyota will strive to advance environmental technology and develop low-carbon technologies and technologies for maximizing safety through interaction with the transport infrastructure to lay a foundation for sustainable and amenable future mobility.
“Our commitment to quality, constant innovation”

 

 	•	 	Toyota is committed to providing quality vehicles that are highly reliable and driven with a sense of safety and reliability.
 

 	•	 	Toyota will constantly reinvent itself and continue to engage in cutting-edge technology development. Toyota will work towards offering vehicles around the world that address the needs of today and of tomorrow at affordable prices.
“Respect for the planet”

 

 	•	 	Toyota will continue working to minimize environmental impact in its manufacturing and other operations, as well as in its products.
 

 	•	 	Toyota’s activities will include conserving energy and reducing output of carbon dioxide, as well as conserving material resources through recycling; it will also include establishing mindsets and production methods appropriate for coexistence with nature.
“Exceed expectations and be rewarded with a smile”

 

 	•	 	Everyone at Toyota will continuously maintain a sense of gratitude to customers and will strive to earn smiles with products and services that are stimulating and inspiring and exceed customer expectations.
“There is always a better way”

 

 	•	 	All Toyota employees will share the recognition that there is always a better way and share a commitment to continuous improvement, which are fundamental to The Toyota Way.
“Meet challenging goals by engaging the talent and passion of people”

 

 	•	 	Toyota will nurture a corporate culture where teamwork and individual creativity thrive and where people will approach their work with pride and passion.
 

 	•	 	Toyota will honor the spirit of diversity in recruiting, training and promoting capable individuals around the world. Human resources development at Toyota will continue to promote the transfer of the company’s monozukuri spirit of conscientious manufacturing and related skills and know-how from one generation to the next.
Based on these initiatives, the Toyota group will contribute to “enriching lives of communities” by providing “ever-better cars.” This is expected to encourage more customers to purchase Toyota cars and thereby lead to the establishment of a stable business base. The automotive industry is facing a time of profound transformation that could happen only once in a hundred years in response to significant technological innovation such as electrification, connected vehicles and automated driving. Toyota is committed to realizing a mobility society of the future that enables everyone to enjoy freedom of movement beyond the conventional concept of vehicles.

 

12

Table of Contents
Toyota Environmental Challenge 2050

Positioning responding to environmental issues as one of the most prioritized challenges for management, Toyota has tackled head-on activities such as the development and promotion of next-generation vehicles including hybrid vehicles (“HVs”) and fuel cell vehicles (“FCVs”), efficient production that puts less of a burden on the environment, the recycling of end-of-life vehicles and hybrid vehicle batteries, planting trees for the coexistence of humans and nature in harmony, and conservation of ecosystems.

However, in recent years, the seriousness and reach of environmental issues has increased, as evidenced by global warming, water shortages, resource depletion, and degradation of biodiversity. In response to the situation, Toyota believes it is necessary to take on new challenges that consider the world 20 or 30 years in the future, in order to remain closely aligned with the global environment. Accordingly, Toyota announced Toyota Environmental Challenge 2050 in October 2015.

In order to contribute to the realization of a sustainable society, the Toyota Environmental Challenge 2050 has set forth the following six challenges for Toyota to address. Those challenges are to reduce CO2 emissions from driving and producing, as well as throughout the lifecycle of, vehicles, and to ensure a net positive impact on the Earth and society toward 2050.

 

 	1.	New Vehicle Zero CO2 Emissions Challenge
 

 	2.	Life Cycle Zero CO2 Emissions Challenge
 

 	3.	Plant Zero CO2 Emissions Challenge
 

 	4.	Challenge of Minimizing and Optimizing Water Usage
 

 	5.	Challenge of Establishing a Recycling-Based Society and Systems
 

 	6.	Challenge of Establishing a Future Society in Harmony with Nature
Further strengthening collaboration with the Toyota group and all other stakeholders, Toyota will consolidate new ideas, dynamism and technology to tackle together the realization of a truly sustainable society from a long-term perspective.

Automotive Operations

Toyota’s revenues from its automotive operations were ¥26,397.9 billion in fiscal 2018, ¥25,081.8 billion in fiscal 2017 and ¥25,977.4 billion in fiscal 2016.

Toyota produces and sells passenger vehicles, minivans and commercial vehicles such as trucks. Toyota Motor Corporation’s subsidiary, Daihatsu Motor Co., Ltd. (“Daihatsu”), produces and sells mini-vehicles and compact cars. Hino Motors, Ltd. (“Hino”), also a subsidiary of Toyota Motor Corporation, produces and sells commercial vehicles such as trucks and buses. Toyota also manufactures automotive parts, components and accessories for its own use and for sale to others.

With an aim to strengthen competitiveness in the small car segment, on January 29, 2016, Toyota and Daihatsu entered into a share exchange agreement to make Daihatsu a wholly-owned subsidiary of Toyota as of August 1, 2016. From January 2017, Toyota and Daihatsu established the “Emerging-market Compact Car Company” to promote development of competitive products in emerging markets. Through planning and implementation of optimal strategies including combining their technical expertise and bases of operations, bold cost reduction and expansion of product lineups with a global brand strategy, Daihatsu will play a key role in developing globally competitive small cars of both brands based on the technology Daihatsu has developed through manufacturing of mini-vehicles.

 

13

Table of Contents
Vehicle Models

Toyota’s vehicles (produced by Toyota, Daihatsu and Hino) can be classified into three categories: HVs, conventional engine vehicles, and FCVs. Toyota’s product line-up includes subcompact and compact cars, mini-vehicles, mid-size, luxury, sports and specialty cars, recreational and sport-utility vehicles, pickup trucks, minivans, trucks and buses.

Hybrid Vehicles

The world’s first mass-produced hybrid car was Toyota’s Prius. It runs on an efficient combination of a gasoline engine and motor. This system allows the Prius to travel more efficiently than conventional engine vehicles of comparable size and performance. The hybrid design of the Prius also results in the output of 75% less emission than the maximum amount allowed by Japanese environmental regulations. Toyota views the Prius as the cornerstone of its emphasis on designing and producing eco-friendly automobiles.

In the last three years, Toyota has strengthened its hybrid lineup by introducing the fully remodeled Alphard HV and Vellfire HV in January 2015, the Sienta HV in June 2015, the fully remodeled RX-HV in September 2015 and the fully remodeled Prius in November 2015, as well as adding Auris HV in April 2016, Prius PHV and the new model C-HR HV in October 2016, the new model LC HV in March 2017, the fully remodeled Camry HV in June 2017, the fully remodeled LS HV in October 2017, JPN TAXI, which employs a newly developed LPG HV, in October 2017, the fully remodeled Avalon HV in April 2018, the fully remodeled Corolla HB HV in May 2018 and the fully remodeled Crown HV and Century HV in June 2018. In the area of HVs, where strong growth is seen, Toyota aims to continue its efforts to offer a diverse line-up of HVs, enhance engine power while improving fuel economy and otherwise work towards increasing the sales of HVs.

Fuel Cell Vehicles

Toyota began limited sales of a fuel cell vehicle in Japan and the United States in December 2002. Since then, Toyota has made advances by solving technological issues such as the above and worked towards the practical use of such solutions, culminating in the general sale of the world’s first mass produced fuel cell vehicle MIRAI in Japan beginning in December 2014, in the United States beginning in June 2015 and in Europe beginning in September 2015. Toyota also launched “SORA,” the first production model fuel cell bus to receive vehicle type certification in Japan, in March 2018.

Conventional Engine Vehicles

Subcompact and Compact

Toyota’s subcompact and compact cars include the four-door Corolla sedan, which is one of Toyota’s bestselling models. The Yaris, marketed as the Vitz in Japan, is a subcompact car designed to perform better and offer greater comfort than other compact cars available in the market with low emissions that are particularly attractive to European consumers. In Europe, Toyota introduced the fully remodeled Aygo in June 2014. In Japan, Toyota introduced, in addition to the Corolla and Vitz, the Prius C (named Aqua in Japan), as well as Passo, Roomy and Tank, which three vehicles are OEM vehicles supplied by Daihatsu. In India, Asia, China and other markets, Toyota introduced the Etios and Vios, as well as the AGYA and Rush, which are designed and manufactured by Daihatsu, and Yaris iA, which is designed and manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation (“Mazda”).

Mini-Vehicles

Mini-vehicles are manufactured and sold by Daihatsu. Daihatsu manufactures mini-vehicles, passenger vehicles, commercial vehicles and auto parts. Mini-vehicles are passenger vehicles, vans or trucks with engine displacements of 660 cubic centimeters or less. Daihatsu sold approximately 586 thousand mini-vehicles and

 

14

Table of Contents
220 thousand automobiles on a consolidated basis during fiscal 2018. Daihatsu’s largest market is Japan, which accounted for approximately 80% of Daihatsu’s unit sales during fiscal 2018. From 2011, Toyota began to sell some mini-vehicles manufactured by Daihatsu under the Toyota brand.

Mid-Size

Toyota’s mid-size models include the Camry, which has been the bestselling passenger car in the United States for twenty of the past twenty-one calendar years (from 1997 to present) and also for the last sixteen consecutive years. The Camry was fully remodeled in June 2017. Camry sales in the United States for 2018 were approximately 387 thousand units (including Camry hybrids). In addition, Toyota’s other mid-size models include the REIZ for the Chinese market and the Avensis for the European market.

Luxury and Large

In North America, Europe, Japan and other regions, Toyota’s luxury lineup consists primarily of vehicles sold under the Lexus brand name. Lexus passenger car models include the LS, the GS, the ES, the IS, the CT, the LC and the RC. Lexus models also include the LX, the GX, the RX and the NX sold as luxury sport-utility vehicles. Toyota commenced sales of its luxury automobiles in Japan under the Lexus brand in August 2005. As of March 31, 2018, the Lexus brand lineup in Japan includes the LS, the GS, the IS, the CT, the LX, the RX, the NX, the LC and the RC. The Toyota brand’s full-size luxury car, the Avalon, was remodeled in April 2018, and the Crown was fully remodeled in June 2018. Toyota also fully remodeled the Century limousine in Japan in June 2018.

Sports and Specialty

In April 2012, Toyota introduced the 86 (called Scion FR-S in the U.S.), a compact sports car with a front-mounted engine and rear-wheel drive. In October 2014, Toyota introduced the RC coupe that leads the image of Lexus, which engages drivers on a sentimental level. In March 2017, Toyota introduced LC, the new model flagship coupe for Lexus.

Recreational and Sport-Utility Vehicles and Pickup Trucks

Toyota sells a variety of sport-utility vehicles and pickup trucks. Toyota’s sport-utility vehicles available in North America include the Sequoia, the 4Runner, the RAV4, the Highlander, the FJ Cruiser and the Land Cruiser, and pickup trucks available are the Tacoma and Tundra. The Tacoma, the Tundra, the Highlander and the Sequoia are manufactured in the United States. Toyota also offers four types of sport-utility vehicles under the Lexus brand, including the LX, the GX, the RX, and the NX. Toyota also manufactures the RX and RAV4 models in Canada. Toyota’s pickup truck, the Hilux, has been the bestselling model of all Toyota cars sold in Thailand. In July 2014, Toyota introduced the new NX model under the Lexus brand. In May 2015, Toyota introduced the fully remodeled Hilux and in September 2015, it introduced the fully remodeled RX of the Lexus brand. In December 2016, Toyota introduced C-HR, a model with a focus on both design and drive.

Minivans and Cabwagons

Toyota offers several basic models for the global minivan market. Its largest minivans in Japan, the Alphard and the Vellfire, were remodeled in January 2015. In addition, the Noah/Voxy was remodeled in January 2014 and the new model Esquire was introduced in October 2014 in Japan. The new model Calya, an original equipment manufacturing (“OEM”) vehicle by Daihatsu, was introduced in July 2016 in Indonesia. Toyota’s other minivan models include, in Japan, the Estima and the Sienta, and, in North America, the Sienna.

Trucks and Buses

Toyota’s product lineup includes trucks (including vans) up to a gross vehicle weight of five tons and micro-buses that are sold in Japan and in overseas markets. Toyota launched “SORA,” a production model fuel cell bus,

 

15

Table of Contents
in Japan in March 2018. Trucks and buses are also manufactured and sold by Hino, a subsidiary of Toyota. Hino’s product lineup includes large trucks with a gross vehicle weight of over eleven tons, medium trucks with a gross vehicle weight of between five and eleven tons and small trucks with a gross vehicle weight of up to five tons. Hino’s bus lineup includes medium to large buses used primarily as tour buses and public buses, as well as small buses and micro-buses.

Product Development

New cars introduced in Japan during fiscal 2018 and thereafter include the Hilux, the JPN TAXI and TOYOTA driving school vehicles. The remodeled car in Japan during fiscal 2018 and thereafter is the Camry HV. Remodeled cars outside of Japan during fiscal 2018 and thereafter include the Lexus LS, the Avalon and the Camry.

In addition, the IMV product lineup based on the IMV project to optimize global manufacturing and supply systems is a lineup of strategic multipurpose vehicles produced from a single platform to meet market demand. The IMV product lineup includes, as of March 31, 2017, the Hilux, Fortuner, and Innova, one or all of which are available in all regions.Toyota and its affiliated companies produce automobiles and related parts and components through more than 50 overseas manufacturing companies in 26 countries and regions besides Japan. Toyota’s major manufacturing facilities include plants in Japan, the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, France, Turkey, Thailand, China, Taiwan, India, Indonesia, South Africa, Argentina and Brazil. Daihatsu brand vehicles are produced at 4 factories in Japan and 2 manufacturing companies in 2 other countries of Indonesia and Malaysia. Hino brand vehicles are produced at 2 factories in Japan and 10 manufacturing companies in 10 countries, including Indonesia and Thailand. For a listing of Toyota’s principal production facilities, see “Information on the Company — Property, Plants and Equipment.”

In promoting a sustainable growth strategy, establishing a system capable of providing optimal supply of products in the global market is integral to Toyota’s strategy.

In line with its basic policy of manufacturing in countries or regions where there is demand and where Toyota is truly competitive, Toyota will make efficient use of and maximize capacity utilization at its existing plants to respond to the expanding market and will continue to focus on making efficient capital investments as necessary. Furthermore, Toyota will continue to place top priority on safety and quality in strengthening true competitiveness with the aim of achieving sustainable growth.

In 2017, 75.9% of Toyota vehicles sold in overseas markets were manufactured in overseas plants by Toyota and its unconsolidated affiliated companies. In 2017, approximately 71.1% of Toyota vehicles sold in North America were produced in North America. Of the vehicles sold in Europe in 2017, approximately 81.5% were produced in Europe. In fiscal 2018, Toyota produced on a consolidated basis 4,286 thousand vehicles in Japan and 4,678 thousand vehicles overseas, compared to 4,109 thousand vehicles in Japan and 4,866 thousand vehicles overseas in fiscal 2017.

 

23

Table of Contents
The following table shows Toyota’s worldwide vehicle unit production by geographic market for the periods shown. These production figures do not include vehicles produced by Toyota’s unconsolidated affiliated companies. The sales unit information elsewhere in this annual report includes sales of vehicles produced by these affiliated companies. Vehicles produced by Daihatsu and Hino are included in the vehicle production figures set forth below.Improving Efficiency

Toyota is working on the following to create a corporate structure allowing for efficient development, production and sales that can respond flexibly to changes in the external environment:

 

 	•	 	working with suppliers as one team to dramatically increase the efficiency of development;
 

 	•	 	creating a production structure that can better withstand fluctuations in demand and currency exchange rates; and
 

 	•	 	strengthening sales capabilities in line with local conditions.
Toyota also plans to improve profitability and enhance operating efficiency by continuing to pursue aggressive cost reduction programs, including:

 

 	•	 	improving product development and production efficiencies through the re-integration and improvement of vehicle platforms and power trains as well as through the development of electronic platforms which organize electronic devices of vehicles as a package and standardize electronic structure and infrastructure;
 

 	•	 	reinforcing and promoting Ryohin-Renka Cost Innovation (“RR-CI”) activity, which aims for the elimination of waste in all processes from design to production while ensuring the reliability and safety of each part;
 

 	•	 	applying advanced information technologies to improve efficiency throughout the product development and production processes;
 

 	•	 	globally reinforcing the supply base under an open and fair purchasing policy;
 

 	•	 	streamlining production systems; and
 

 	•	 	improving the efficiency of domestic and international distribution.
Toyota is further improving production efficiency by installing more versatile equipment and systems, modifying vehicle body designs to allow for a greater variety of models on each production line and sharing more parts among vehicles, not simply among different models but also among different platforms.

In April 2012, Toyota announced a new development framework, the TNGA, which reconciles sweeping advances in product appeal with cost reductions. The new framework sets forth an architecture that incorporates not only the three fundamental vehicle functions of moving, turning and stopping, but also ergonomics such as driving position as well as freedom of design. Toyota plans to efficiently develop cars with high basic-performance attributes by developing parts and modules based on this architecture. The TNGA provides for

 

26

Table of Contents
handling multiple models simultaneously in grouped development projects that will increase the sharing of parts and core vehicle components. This sharing, carried out in cooperation with suppliers, will result in lowered costs, thereby allowing developmental manpower and funds to be reinvested in R&D to meet consumer preferences and R&D to meet regional needs, resulting in further product improvement.

By April 2013, Toyota established systems to rapidly promote the TNGA and carried out product development under this new way of doing business. As a result, Toyota realized high basic performance and marketability in the Prius that was introduced in Japan in December 2015. Toyota subsequently launched the all-new Camry in 2017. Toyota has rolled out, and plans to continue to roll out, the results of such development to other vehicles as well.

Realizing a Smart Mobility Society that expands through connected car technologies

Toyota is moving forward with initiatives striving to realize a smart mobility society, in which people can enjoy freedom of movement and feel at ease and excited, by connecting vehicles, people and communities with its connected car technologies in order to meet the needs of rapidly changing societies, including the falling birth rate and aging populations in developed nations, an increasingly diverse range of energy sources and the evolution of IoT, among others. In particular, Toyota aims to contribute to an affluent lifestyle that offers peace of mind by enhancing vehicle functionality that will increase the attractiveness of vehicles and the excitement of driving, enhancing transport systems that make being in cars more comfortable and more environmentally friendly, and realizing Smart Communities that aim for optimization of local energy use and establishment of a low-carbon emission transportation system.

Enhancing Vehicle Functionality — Information Service Functions

To Toyota, enhancing vehicle functionality means advancing information service functions that integrate vehicles with telecommunication systems, and driving assistance functions that use communication technologies and sensor technologies to create vehicles with intelligent features. Information service functions can improve convenience and enrich the driving experience through information communication technologies that add new functions that are connected to the basic vehicle functions of “running, turning and stopping.” Examples include the following:

 

 	•	 	Toyota is advancing enhancement of car navigation systems, such as car parking maps that display detailed information inside car parks, as well as the VICS system (Vehicle Information and Communication System) that provides real-time road traffic information such as congestion, accidents, traffic restrictions and parking. Car navigation systems play an increasingly important role in providing drivers with various types of information on safety, smooth traveling, comfort and convenience.
 

 	•	 	T-Connect/G-BOOK is the latest information network service that merges the latest network technologies and car multimedia a step ahead of the arrival of the ubiquitous network society. T-Connect/G-BOOK provides various types of information useful for driving, as well as safety and security services that detect unusual conditions in the vehicle, thereby supporting a lifestyle with one’s vehicles anytime and anywhere through a network. In 2005, Toyota started G-BOOK ALPHA and G-Link for Lexus, each with additional various features including traffic congestion forecast service. In 2007, Toyota launched G-BOOK mX, which in addition to the well-received conventional safety and security services of G-BOOK, introduced even more useful car navigation services such as “Map-on-Demand” — the world’s first technology for automatically updating map data — and “Probe Communication Traffic Information” that provides drivers with highly precise information on traffic congestion. In 2014, Toyota launched T-Connect, which in addition to conventional telematics services, provides new services and functions through the distribution of applications to on-board device, as well as destination and other information searches through the adoption of a voice recognition system.
 

 	•	 	
HELPNET is an emergency dial system that, in the event of a traffic accident or medical emergency, transmits information required for emergency rescue, such as present-location data and vehicle details,

 

27

Table of Contents
 	
either automatically or with the touch of a button. It immediately contacts police and fire departments through the HELPNET Operation Center. This system is integrated into T-Connect/G-BOOK and G-Link to improve the quality of services. HELPNET shortens the time taken to report following an emergency situation, which contributes to decreasing the number of traffic accident fatalities and reducing the level of impact, while at the same time aiming to prevent secondary disasters and ease traffic congestion.

In addition to the above, Toyota also operates a Japanese-language web portal for automobile information, GAZOO.com. The name “GAZOO” originates from the Japanese word gazo, meaning images. GAZOO was established as an Internet membership service linking Toyota, its national dealer network and GAZOO members, and has provided information on new and used Toyota vehicles and related services, as well as online shopping services. GAZOO later expanded to include information on other automakers, as well as a rich blog feature as a social networking portal site on automobiles. In addition, GAZOO has exhanced its contents line-up through which Toyota aims to expand the fan base of car enthusiasts by promoting activities where customers can experience in real life the enjoyment that cars offer, such as TOYOTA GAZOO Racing. GAZOO is currently in charge of all Toyota motor sports activities (such as WRC, WEC and SuperGT). Toyota utilized its GAZOO technology that links the customers, distributors and Toyota to further expand its automobile information service by launching the G-BOOK telematics service in Japan in fall 2002 and G-Link, which is a service exclusive to Lexus, in August 2005. Toyota also offers a theft detection system, vehicle tracking service and operator support service as standard services to enhance services aiming to provide safety, security and comfort for T-Connect/G-BOOK and G-Link users in their lifestyle using vehicles. With G-BOOK mX announced in April 2007, Toyota started offering services that allow drivers to use more convenient navigation systems such as “Map-on-Demand” — the world’s first technology for automatically updating map data. In addition, Toyota has further strengthened its linkage between GAZOO and G-BOOK and has, for example, allowed map information searched on a blog on GAZOO.com to be used on G-BOOK, further maturing as a comprehensive telematics service. In Japan, Toyota is seeking to promote the use of the T-Connect/G-BOOK by equipping all Lexus models and certain Crown models with the T-Connect/G-BOOK as a standard feature. Toyota has also licensed its T-Connect/G-BOOK technology to certain other competitors in Japan. Toyota is applying the technology and experience which it has accumulated in Japan to regions outside Japan; G-BOOK services were introduced in China in March 2009, and unique telematics services in the United States were launched in August 2009. In addition, Toyota began offering telematics services for smartphones in December 2010 in Japan, and began to offer the same service in Thailand in March 2012 and the Middle East from January 2014 (UAE, Qatar and Lebanon in January 2014, Saudi Arabia in August 2014, Bahrain in October 2014 and Kuwait in January 2015).

In addition, in March 2004, Toyota launched its CRM (Customer Relationship Management) system called e-CRB (evolutionary Customer Relationship Building) in Thailand. e-CRB builds on a technology cultivated through the development of Gazoo and G-BOOK and offers its customers a variety of services such as providing information on new vehicles, accepting requests for brochures and estimates and notifying customers when it is time for maintenance by keeping track of the vehicle’s maintenance history and mileage. In addition, e-CRB offers an advanced operation system that can be utilized comprehensively at dealers including new and used cars and services. Toyota is promoting e-CRB in countries such as China, Thailand, Australia, India and Brazil where steady progress has been made as the service-in ratio has increased. In 2013, Toyota introduced the next-generation e-CRB that adopts tablet terminals (portable information processing terminals) in China. These tablet terminals are supporting the improvement of customer satisfaction at points of sale and in after-sale service.

Toyota also introduced a system called Sales Logistics Integrated Management (“SLIM”) in Guangzhou, China and India. By utilizing real sales information and linking with production and distribution, Toyota is able to realize the Just-in-Time production system of producing and delivering only the number of vehicles that have been sold. SLIM has been recognized to significantly increase the freshness of inventory and improve cash flow.

In September 2010, Toyota announced its smart-grid initiatives, which are intended to demonstrate efficient energy use toward the realization of a low-carbon and energy-saving society. By utilizing technology cultivated

 

28

Table of Contents
through the Internet and telematics services mentioned above, Toyota developed the Toyota Smart Center (“TSC”) that optimally controls electricity and links EVs and PHVs with homes, and conducted a demonstration project in Rokkasho Village in Aomori aimed at reducing overall CO2 emissions and users’ electricity costs. In addition, in order to develop a global platform of the TSC, Toyota announced a partnership with Microsoft Corp. in April 2011 and a partnership with Salesforce.com in May 2011. Toyota plans to utilize the cloud technology of these two companies in its Internet and telematics services to build a framework for TSC’s global implementation. In January 2012, Toyota began eConnect and “TOYOTA friend” services for PHV. In May 2013, Toyota utilized the latest version of Microsoft’s SharePoint to comprehensively redesign GAZOO, the automobile information portal site. Toyota aims to offer new services, achieve better vehicle quality and enhance product attractiveness as well as contribute further to society by utilizing the vehicle information, road conditions and other parameters collected via telematics services and stored at the TSC. With regard to contribution to society, Toyota began offering the Big Data Traffic Information Service in June 2013, through which traffic information, statistics and other related information are provided to local governments, universities and businesses to support traffic flow improvement and assist disaster prevention measures. In December 2016, Toyota launched the TC Smartphone Navigation free-of-charge to users, including those other than Toyota users, to provide readily usable route history maps. Toyota plans to continue to work with new information technologies and the IT industry to establish a framework for TSC’s global implementation and to realize a mobility society of the future.

In 2016, Toyota has been working actively on “connected car technology” and alliances with other companies for effective vehicle data utilization to “make ever-better cars” and for safer and securer “connected” service. In January 2016, Toyota announced a “connected vehicle framework” to increase installation of a Data Communication Module (DCM) into a broader range of its vehicles starting in the United States from 2017. In April 2016, Toyota established a new company, “Toyota Connected, Inc.,” in the United States to consolidate and analyze information collected from vehicles and to develop new products, and thereby promoting “making ever-better cars” through utilizing big data. In addition, Toyota is collaborating with insurance companies on developing insurance services as well as tying up with a sharing service company, thereby actively advancing research for new services and the realization of a mobility society utilizing big data.

As a further engagement in the insurance industry, Toyota established Toyota Insurance Management Solutions USA, LLC (“TIMS”), a new U.S. telematics car insurance services company, to promote analysis of big data and development of algorithms. TIMS provides telematics insurance services best suited to Toyota’s customers by consolidating Toyota’s data, financing and insurance knowhow.

In November 2016, based on the proliferation and popularity of mobility services such as car-sharing, Toyota started to establish the Mobility Services Platform (“MSPF”), which has various functions to support mobility services, leveraging the TSC, the Toyota Big Data Center, and financial services. MSPF is a platform that aggregates and covers individual business functions, such as vehicle management systems and leasing programs, that Toyota developed and offered to mobility service providers such as ridesharing operators when working together with them. As one example of the functions that MSPF offers, to enhance a MSPF-based car-sharing, Toyota developed the smart key box (“SKB”) that enables users to lock and unlock doors and to start the engine with their smartphone — thus providing a safer and more secure way of lending and renting cars. Using the MSPF and SKB, Toyota started a pilot program in collaboration with Getaround, a venture company providing car-sharing services targeted at individuals in the United States, in March 2017 in San Francisco, California. In addition, Toyota is working with Toyota Financial Services Corporation (“TFSC”) to make vehicles with expired leases available on Getaround, in order to effectively utilize TFSC’s assets. Toyota is also examining the viability of car sharing using SKBs. Furthermore, Servco Pacific Inc., a Toyota dealer in Hawaii, has begun an employee-only car-sharing services program.

Toyota and Uber Technologies, Inc. have entered into a memorandum of understanding to explore collaboration with respect to ridesharing. As part of the partnership, the companies created new leasing options in which car purchasers can lease vehicles with connected terminals from Toyota Financial Services and cover their

 

29

Table of Contents
payments through earnings generated as Uber drivers. In Southeast Asia, Toyota started to collaborate with Grab, Inc. (“Grab”) in August 2017, and commenced a pilot program in Singapore to collect driving data generated from vehicles owned by Grab. In June 2018, Toyota further expanded the collaboration and invested in Grab. Toyota is moving forward with providing various connected services that use MSPF to Grab, and will consider future collaboration with Grab in the area of Mobility as a Service (“MaaS”).

Toyota and Japan Federation of Hire-Taxi Associations have entered into a memorandum of understanding to explore areas for collaboration, so as to develop and introduce the “Japanese taxi of the future.” Through use of taxis to collect and analyze of information concerning the road traffic environment, and applying those results to the development of the Mobility Teammate Concept, which embodies Toyota’s vision of automated driving, Toyota and the Japan Federation of Hire-Taxi Associations will continue to be important partners in helping to develop Japanese taxis into the “world’s safest, most pleasant, world-class public transportation service” and to strengthen the Japanese transportation infrastructure.

With the background of expanding mobility services and the tightening of data regulations in Europe, Toyota has established Toyota Connected Europe, and plans to utilize MSPF in Europe as well to promote car-sharing businesses in coordination with local dealers.

In January 2018, Toyota announced the e-Palette Concept, a next generation EV designed exclusively for MaaS, leveraging electrification, connected vehicles and automated driving technologies. The e-Palette Concept can be adapted for various services, such as passenger transportation, logistics services or retail services, and is the embodiment of Toyota’s concept of “new mobility” that supports the lifestyles of its customers. Amazon.com, Inc., DiDi Chuxing, Pizza Hut, LLC, Uber Technologies, Inc. and Mazda Motor Corporation are collaborating with Toyota as initial launch partners in order to explore vehicle specifications that are even more practical and to ensure the realization of a new mobility service.

Enhancing Vehicle Functionality — Driving Assistance Functions

Toyota’s driving assistance functions offer functions that assist drivers with an aim to lessen the burden of driving, enhance safety and provide to everyone the pleasure of driving. Toyota has commercialized enhancements to various functions that assist the driver in sensing external information, avoiding danger and making appropriate maneuvers. Examples of driving assistance functions include the following:

 

 	•	 	VDIM (Vehicle Dynamics Integrated Management) is a system that constantly monitors the driver’s operations and the vehicle’s situation and centrally manages the engine, steering mechanisms and brakes. By stabilizing the vehicle before the driver loses control of the vehicle, VDIM achieves a high level of ‘active safety’ and improves driving performance, consisting namely of running, turning and stopping.
 

 	•	 	“Pre-collision System” is a system that perceives possibilities of a crash with obstacles, cars in front or crossing pedestrians through a sensor installed in a vehicle. If a collision seems likely, it proceeds to activate warnings as well as brake assistance, which aids the driver’s operation of the brake, or the automatic braking system, which aids in avoiding the collision altogether or mitigates any damage.
 

 	•	 	“Radar Cruise Control (with all-speed tracking function)” allows the vehicle to keep a constant distance between itself and the preceding vehicle within a speed range from zero to a preset speed, automatically slowing down and stopping if necessary to avoid collision. When the car in front speeds up, it allows the driver to accelerate.
 

 	•	 	“Lane Departure Alert” is a system that uses a camera to detect white or yellow lane markers while driving. The system warns the driver with a buzzer and displays if it detects possible deviation in order to assist in avoiding a collision accident resulting from deviation. In addition, “Lane Keeping Assist System,” a system that assists the driver’s operation of the steering wheel with electric power steering in order to help keep the vehicle traveling between lane markers, has been developed.
 

30

Table of Contents
 	•	 	“Automatic High Beam” detects the headlights of oncoming vehicles or taillights of vehicles running in front and adjusts the headlight range, automatically switching to low beam or high beam, in order to avoid dazzling the visions of the drivers with bright lights, as well as to secure the drivers’ forward visions at night.
 

 	•	 	“Blind Spot Monitor” is a system which aims to reduce accidents by alerting the driver to other vehicles in the driver’s blind spot diagonally behind the driver’s seat with sound and visual display in the side mirrors while changing lanes.
From these driving assistance functions, in 2015 Toyota commercialized the Toyota Safety Sense, a collision avoidance support package that includes the Pre-collision System, the Lane Departure Alert and the Automatic High Beam. By the end of 2017, Toyota had completed installation of this package on nearly all models sold in Japan, the United States and Europe at an affordable price aimed at widespread adaption.

Enhancing Transport Systems

Enhancing transport systems requires taking a general approach that addresses various factors across a wide scope that are pertinent not only to vehicles but also roads, people and public transport systems in order to ensure smooth and efficient movement of people and vehicles and to build a safe transportation environment. In addition to VICS and ETC (Electronic Toll Collection System), which are already standard in Japan, the “Cooperative ITS,” which combines cutting edge IT and vehicle technology, is in development and has begun to be partially implemented.

 

 	•	 	The operation of “ETC2.0” commenced in 2009 and corresponding products are available for purchase. Mainly for use on highways, this service provides drivers with information related to road traffic and safe driving that is transmitted from road infrastructures to car navigation systems via video and voice.
 

 	•	 	In the summer of 2011, Toyota introduced products corresponding to the driving safety support system, “DSSS,” which the National Police Agency has started operating. Mainly for use on general roads, this system supports safe driving, including by preventing the driver from overlooking red lights, by transmitting traffic control information (such as traffic lights and signs) and peripheral information from road infrastructures to automobiles.
 

 	•	 	Aiming at further reducing accidents, “ITS Connect,” a driving safety support system that uses a dedicated ITS frequency of 760 MHz, was introduced in the fall of 2015. Through direct and continuous exchange of information between vehicles and the road and among vehicles, this system aims to mitigate accidents near intersections, which have been difficult to mitigate to date. The system also includes Communicating Radar Cruise Control features, which supports smooth acceleration and deceleration when following behind another vehicle. In addition, from August 2017, Toyota and Mazda started a partnership in the field of advanced safety technologies and a collaboration in Toyota’s vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-infrastructure technologies, and aims at the realization of automated driving in which all drivers can move safely, smoothly and freely by harmonizing ITS technology and vehicle control technology.
Toyota is committed to developing new ITS products. Toyota believes that intelligent transport systems will become an integral part of its overall automotive operations and enhance the competitiveness of its vehicles. As familiarity with and demand for ITS products grow, Toyota expects an increasing number of ITS products to become commercially available and achieve greater acceptance each year.

Smart Communities

In April 2010, Toyota City was selected as a “Model Region for Next-Generation Energy Systems” by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. Toyota since joined the “Toyota City Low-Carbon Society Verification Council” (established in August 2010), and carried out experiments relating to the “Optimization of

 

31

Table of Contents
Local Energy Use in Households and Destinations (commercial and public facilities)” and “Establishment of a System for Low-Carbon Emission Transportation” until March 2015. As a way of building on the results of such experiments, Toyota launched an experimental ultra-compact electric vehicle sharing program in Tokyo from April 2015. It also launched an experimental ultra-compact electric vehicle program for tourism using a Toyota developed car-sharing system in Okinawa from January 2016. An experimental car-sharing program was also implemented in Okayama City from October through December 2016, and from October 2017 through January 2018. Furthermore, in Toyota City and Okinawa, these experimental programs were commercialized, and management was transferred to local companies and organizations in April 2017.

Research and Development of, and Collaboration Regarding, Connected Platforms

With respect to research and development of platform technologies to make connected services a reality in the future, Toyota is moving forward with the following research and development activities related to in-vehicle system technologies as well as telecommunication and data processing system technologies by means of both open collaboration led by a nonprofit organization as well as collaboration with certain other companies.

For in-vehicle system technologies, a collaborative open source project is underway to develop an operating system for in-vehicle multimedia telematics systems based on the open source software Linux, but incorporating in-vehicle requirements. Named Automotive Grade Linux, the operating system is being developed in collaboration with other auto companies as well as companies that design a manufacture the hardware and software for devices that make up in-vehicle systems, under the initiative of Linux Foundation, an incorporated nonprofit organization. With respect to functions that link in-vehicle multimedia system to smartphones, Toyota established a nonprofit organization called Smart Device Link Consortium in November 2016, jointly with Ford and certain other auto companies, to develop specifications for in-vehicle multimedia systems and their related platform software.

For telecommunication and server system technologies, Toyota is developing a “global mobile communications platform,” which allows for globally integrated management of the telecommunication environment, in collaboration with KDDI Corporation. Toyota is also conducting research and development jointly with the NTT Group in the areas of data processing system technologies and mobile communications technologies that will enable the processing of big data obtained from vehicles in the future.
3.D RISK FACTORS

Industry and Business Risks

The worldwide automotive market is highly competitive.

The worldwide automotive market is highly competitive. Toyota faces intense competition from automotive manufacturers in the markets in which it operates. Although the global economy continues to recover gradually, competition in the automotive industry has further intensified amidst difficult overall market conditions. In addition, competition is likely to further intensify in light of further continuing globalization in the worldwide automotive industry, possibly resulting in industry reorganizations. Factors affecting competition include product quality and features, safety, reliability, fuel economy, the amount of time required for innovation and development, pricing, customer service and financing terms. Increased competition may lead to lower vehicle unit sales, which may result in a further downward price pressure and adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. Toyota’s ability to adequately respond to the recent rapid changes in the automotive market and to maintain its competitiveness will be fundamental to its future success in existing and new markets and to maintain its market share. There can be no assurances that Toyota will be able to compete successfully in the future.

The worldwide automotive industry is highly volatile.

Each of the markets in which Toyota competes has been subject to considerable volatility in demand. Demand for vehicles depends to a large extent on economic, social and political conditions in a given market and the introduction of new vehicles and technologies. As Toyota’s revenues are derived from sales in markets worldwide, economic conditions in such markets are particularly important to Toyota.

Reviewing the general economic environment for the fiscal year ended March 2018, the world economy has continued its moderate recovery due to the global expansion of trade and production and solid domestic demand. The Japanese economy has been on a moderate recovery due to improvements in employment and income conditions. For the automotive industry, although markets have progressed in a steady manner in the developed countries and expanded in China, markets in some resource-rich countries have slowed down.

The changes in demand for automobiles are continuing, and it is unclear how this situation will transition in the future. Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected if the changes in demand for automobiles continues or progresses further. Demand may also be affected by factors directly impacting vehicle price or the cost of purchasing and operating vehicles such as sales and financing incentives, prices of raw materials and parts and components, cost of fuel and governmental regulations (including tariffs, import regulation and other taxes). Volatility in demand may lead to lower vehicle unit sales, which may result in downward price pressure and adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s future success depends on its ability to offer new, innovative and competitively priced products that meet customer demand on a timely basis.

Meeting customer demand by introducing attractive new vehicles and reducing the amount of time required for product development are critical to automotive manufacturers. In particular, it is critical to meet customer demand with respect to quality, safety and reliability. The timely introduction of new vehicle models, at competitive prices, meeting rapidly changing customer preferences and demand is more fundamental to Toyota’s success than ever, as the automotive market is rapidly transforming in light of the changing global economy. There is no assurance, however, that Toyota will adequately and appropriately respond to changing customer preferences and demand with respect to quality, safety, reliability, styling and other features in a timely manner. Even if Toyota succeeds in perceiving customer preferences and demand, there is no assurance that Toyota will be capable of developing and manufacturing new, price competitive products in a timely manner with its available technology, intellectual property, sources of raw materials and parts and components, and production

 

5

Table of Contents
capacity, including cost reduction capacity. Further, there is no assurance that Toyota will be able to implement capital expenditures at the level and times planned by management. Toyota’s inability to develop and offer products that meet customers’ preferences and demand with respect to quality, safety, reliability, styling and other features in a timely manner could result in a lower market share and reduced sales volumes and margins, and may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s ability to market and distribute effectively is an integral part of Toyota’s successful sales.

Toyota’s success in the sale of vehicles depends on its ability to market and distribute effectively based on distribution networks and sales techniques tailored to the needs of its customers. There is no assurance that Toyota will be able to develop sales techniques and distribution networks that effectively adapt to changing customer preferences or changes in the regulatory environment in the major markets in which it operates. Toyota’s inability to maintain well-developed sales techniques and distribution networks may result in decreased sales and market share and may adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s success is significantly impacted by its ability to maintain and develop its brand image.

In the highly competitive automotive industry, it is critical to maintain and develop a brand image. In order to maintain and develop a brand image, it is necessary to further increase customers’ confidence by providing safe, high-quality products that meet customer preferences and demand. If Toyota is unable to effectively maintain and develop its brand image as a result of its inability to provide safe, high-quality products or as a result of the failure to promptly implement safety measures such as recalls when necessary, vehicle unit sales and/or sale prices may decrease, and as a result revenues and profits may not increase as expected or may decrease, adversely affecting its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota relies on suppliers for the provision of certain supplies including parts, components and raw materials

Toyota purchases supplies including parts, components and raw materials from a number of external suppliers located around the world. For some supplies, Toyota relies on a single supplier or a limited number of suppliers, whose replacement with another supplier may be difficult. Inability to obtain supplies from a single or limited source supplier may result in difficulty obtaining supplies and may restrict Toyota’s ability to produce vehicles. Furthermore, even if Toyota were to rely on a large number of suppliers, first-tier suppliers with whom Toyota directly transacts may in turn rely on a single second-tier supplier or limited second-tier suppliers. Toyota’s ability to continue to obtain supplies from its suppliers in a timely and cost-effective manner is subject to a number of factors, some of which are not within Toyota’s control. These factors include the ability of Toyota’s suppliers to provide a continued source of supply, and Toyota’s ability to effectively compete and obtain competitive prices from suppliers. A loss of any single or limited source supplier or inability to obtain supplies from suppliers in a timely and cost-effective manner could lead to increased costs or delays or suspensions in Toyota’s production and deliveries, which could have an adverse effect on Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

The worldwide financial services industry is highly competitive.

The worldwide financial services industry is highly competitive. Increased competition in automobile financing may lead to decreased margins. A decline in Toyota’s vehicle unit sales, an increase in residual value risk due to lower used vehicle prices, an increase in the ratio of credit losses and increased funding costs are additional factors which may impact Toyota’s financial services operations. If Toyota is unable to adequately respond to the changes and competition in automobile financing, Toyota’s financial services operations may adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations.

Toyota’s operations and vehicles rely on various digital and information technologies.

Toyota depends on various information technology networks and systems, some of which are managed by third parties, to process, transmit and store electronic information, including sensitive data, and to manage or

 

6

Table of Contents
support a variety of business processes and activities, including manufacturing, research and development, supply chain management, sales and accounting. In addition, Toyota’s vehicles may rely on various digital and information technologies, including information service and driving assistance functions. Despite security measures, Toyota’s digital and information technology networks and systems may be vulnerable to damage, disruptions or shutdowns due to attacks by hackers, computer viruses, breaches due to unauthorized use, errors or malfeasance by employees and others who have or gain access to the networks and systems Toyota depends on, service failures or bankruptcy of third parties such as software development or cloud computing vendors, power shortages and outages, and utility failures or other catastrophic events like natural disasters. Such incidents could materially disrupt critical operations, disclose sensitive data, interfere with information services and driving assistance functions in Toyota’s vehicles, and/or give rise to legal claims or proceedings, liability or regulatory penalties under applicable laws, which could have an adverse effect on Toyota’s brand image and its financial condition and results of operations.

Financial Market and Economic Risks

Toyota’s operations are subject to currency and interest rate fluctuations.

Toyota is sensitive to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and is principally exposed to fluctuations in the value of the Japanese yen, the U.S. dollar and the euro and, to a lesser extent, the Australian dollar, the Russian ruble, the Canadian dollar and the British pound. Toyota’s consolidated financial statements, which are presented in Japanese yen, are affected by foreign currency exchange fluctuations through translation risk, and changes in foreign currency exchange rates may also affect the price of products sold and materials purchased by Toyota in foreign currencies through transaction risk. In particular, strengthening of the Japanese yen against the U.S. dollar can have an adverse effect on Toyota’s operating results.

Toyota believes that its use of certain derivative financial instruments including foreign exchange forward contracts and interest rate swaps and increased localized production of its products have reduced, but not eliminated, the effects of interest rate and foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. Nonetheless, a negative impact resulting from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and changes in interest rates may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. For a further discussion of currency and interest rate fluctuations and the use of derivative financial instruments, see “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects — Operating Results — Overview — Currency Fluctuations,” “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk,” and notes 21 and 22 to Toyota’s consolidated financial statements.

High prices of raw materials and strong pressure on Toyota’s suppliers could negatively impact Toyota’s profitability.

Increases in prices for raw materials that Toyota and Toyota’s suppliers use in manufacturing their products or parts and components such as steel, precious metals, non-ferrous alloys including aluminum, and plastic parts, may lead to higher production costs for parts and components. This could, in turn, negatively impact Toyota’s future profitability because Toyota may not be able to pass all those costs on to its customers or require its suppliers to absorb such costs.

A downturn in the financial markets could adversely affect Toyota’s ability to raise capital.

Should the world economy suddenly deteriorate, a number of financial institutions and investors will face difficulties in providing capital to the financial markets at levels corresponding to their own financial capacity, and, as a result, there is a risk that companies may not be able to raise capital under terms that they would expect to receive with their creditworthiness. If Toyota is unable to raise the necessary capital under appropriate conditions on a timely basis, Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected.

 

7

Table of Contents
Regulatory, Legal, Political and Other Risks

The automotive industry is subject to various governmental regulations.

The worldwide automotive industry is subject to various laws and governmental regulations including those related to vehicle safety and environmental matters such as emission levels, fuel economy, noise and pollution. In particular, automotive manufacturers such as Toyota are required to implement safety measures such as recalls for vehicles that do not or may not comply with the safety standards of laws and governmental regulations. In addition, Toyota may, in order to reassure its customers of the safety of Toyota’s vehicles, decide to voluntarily implement recalls or other safety measures even if the vehicle complies with the safety standards of relevant laws and governmental regulations. Many governments also impose tariffs and other trade barriers, taxes and levies, or enact price or exchange controls. Toyota has incurred, and expects to incur in the future, significant costs in complying with these regulations. If Toyota launches products that result in safety measures such as recalls, Toyota may incur various costs including significant costs for free repairs. Furthermore, new legislation or changes in existing legislation may also subject Toyota to additional expenses in the future. If Toyota incurs significant costs related to implementing safety measures or meeting laws and governmental regulations, Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations may be adversely affected.

Toyota may become subject to various legal proceedings.

As an automotive manufacturer, Toyota may become subject to legal proceedings in respect of various issues, including product liability and infringement of intellectual property. Toyota may also be subject to legal proceedings brought by its shareholders and governmental proceedings and investigations. Toyota is in fact currently subject to a number of pending legal proceedings and government investigations. A negative outcome in one or more of these pending legal proceedings could adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations. For a further discussion of governmental regulations, see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Governmental Regulation, Environmental and Safety Standards” and for legal proceedings, please see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Legal Proceedings.”

Toyota may be adversely affected by natural calamities, political and economic instability, fuel shortages or interruptions in social infrastructure, wars, terrorism and labor strikes.

Toyota is subject to various risks associated with conducting business worldwide. These risks include natural calamities; political and economic instability; fuel shortages; interruption in social infrastructure including energy supply, transportation systems, gas, water, or communication systems resulting from natural hazards or technological hazards; wars; terrorism; labor strikes and work stoppages. Should the major markets in which Toyota purchases materials, parts and components and supplies for the manufacture of Toyota products or in which Toyota’s products are produced, distributed or sold be affected by any of these events, it may result in disruptions and delays in the operations of Toyota’s business. Should significant or prolonged disruptions or delays related to Toyota’s business operations occur, it may adversely affect Toyota’s financial condition and results of operations.

5.C RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT, PATENTS AND LICENSES

Toyota’s research and development is dedicated to capturing the increasingly diverse and sophisticated market through the development of attractive, affordable, high-quality products for customers worldwide. The intellectual property that R&D generates is a vital management resource that Toyota utilizes and protects to maximize its corporate value. For a more detailed discussion of the company’s research and development objectives and policies, see “Information on the Company — Business Overview — Research and Development.”

Toyota’s research and development expenditures were approximately ¥1,064.2 billion in fiscal 2018, ¥1,037.5 billion in fiscal 2017, and ¥1,055.6 billion in fiscal 2016.

Toyota operates a global research and development organization with the primary goal of building automobiles that meet the needs of customers in every region of the world. In Japan, research and development operations are led by Toyota and Toyota Central Research & Development Laboratories, Inc., which works closely with Daihatsu Motor Co., Ltd., Hino Motors, Ltd., Toyota Auto Body Co., Ltd., Toyota Motor East Japan, Inc., and many other Toyota group companies. Overseas, Toyota has a worldwide network of technical centers as well as design and motorsports research and development centers.

Toyota established Toyota Research Institute, Inc. (“TRI”) in January 2016 to accelerate research and development of artificial intelligence technology, which has significant potential to support future industrial technologies. In July 2017, Toyota Research Institute, Inc. invested $100 million to launch a venture capital fund designed to provide financing to startup companies, and is making investments in newly established promising startup companies in the four areas of artificial intelligence, robotics, autonomous mobility, and data and cloud technology.

In Japan, Toyota established a new company, Toyota Research Institute-Advanced Development (“TRI-AD”), in March 2018 to further accelerate its efforts in advanced development for automated driving technology. Its key objectives include creating a smooth software pipeline from research to commercialization, leveraging data-handling capabilities, strengthening collaboration in development within the Toyota group, including TRI, to accelerate development, and recruiting and employing top-level engineers globally, while cultivating and coordinating strong talent within the Toyota group.Toyota’s automotive operations include the design, manufacture, assembly and sale of passenger vehicles, minivans and commercial vehicles such as trucks and related parts and accessories. Toyota’s financial services business consists primarily of providing financing to dealers and their customers for the purchase or lease of Toyota vehicles. Toyota’s financial services business also provides retail installment credit and leasing through the purchase of installment and lease contracts originated by Toyota dealers. Related to Toyota’s automotive operations, Toyota is working towards having all of its vehicles become connected vehicles, creating new value and reforming businesses by utilizing big data obtained from those connected vehicles, and establishing new mobility services. Toyota’s all other operations business segment includes the design and manufacture of prefabricated housing and information technology related businesses including a web portal for automobile information called GAZOO.com, etc.The Worldwide Automotive Market

Toyota estimates that annual worldwide vehicle sales totaled approximately 97 million units in 2017.

Automobile sales are affected by a number of factors including:

 

 	•	 	social, political and economic conditions;
 

 	•	 	introduction of new vehicles and technologies; and
 

 	•	 	costs incurred by customers to purchase and operate automobiles.
These factors can cause consumer demand to vary substantially from year to year in different geographic markets and in individual categories of automobiles.

In fiscal 2018, the U.S. saw steady employment growth as well as enhanced consumer spending, economies in Europe expanded at a solid pace under monetary easing measures, and Japan continued to experience favorable employment environment supporting consumption. In emerging markets, China continued to recover due to economic stimulus measures, which led to stronger growth of the global economy, while consumption in resource-rich countries has also been gradually recovering.

The automotive industry was also impacted by these economic trends. In 2017, with respect to developed countries, the automotive market contracted in the United States from the effect of interest-rate hikes, while on the other hand, it expanded in Europe. In addition, in Japan, demand expanded due primarily to the introduction of new models. The automotive markets in emerging countries, including China, as a whole also expanded.

In the medium- to long-term, Toyota expects the automotive market to continue growing driven principally by growth in China and other emerging markets. Global competition is expected to be severe, as competition in compact and low-price vehicles intensifies, and the pace of technological advancement and development of new products quickens, including in response to a heightened global awareness of the environment and more stringent fuel economy standards.

In 2017, China, North America, Europe and Asia were the world’s largest automotive markets. The share of each market across the globe, which Toyota estimates based on the available automobile sales data in each country and region information, was 30% for China, 22% for North America (21% excluding Mexico and Puerto Rico), 22% for Europe and 10% for Asia. In China, new vehicle sales increased to approximately 29.3 million units. In North America, new vehicle sales decreased from the previous year to approximately 20.9 million units. In Europe, new vehicle sales increased to approximately 20.7 million units. In Asia (including India but excluding Japan and China), new vehicle unit sales increased from the previous year to approximately 10 million units.

The worldwide automotive industry is affected significantly by government regulations aimed at reducing harmful effects on the environment, enhancing vehicle safety and improving fuel economy. These regulations have added to the cost of manufacturing vehicles. Many governments also mandate local procurement of parts and components and impose tariffs and other trade barriers, as well as price or exchange controls as a means of creating jobs, protecting domestic producers or influencing their balance of payments. Changes in regulatory requirements and other government-imposed restrictions can limit or otherwise burden an automaker’s operations. Government laws and regulations can also make it difficult to repatriate profits to an automaker’s home country.

The development of the worldwide automotive market includes the continuing globalization of automotive operations. Manufacturers seek to achieve globalization by localizing the design and manufacture of automobiles and their parts and components in the markets in which they are sold. By expanding production capabilities beyond their home markets, automotive manufacturers are able to reduce their exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates as well as to trade restrictions and tariffs.

 

10

Table of Contents
Over the years, there have been many global business alliances and investments entered into between manufacturers in the global automotive industry. There are various reasons behind these transactions including the need to address excessive global capacity in the production of automobiles, and the need to reduce costs and improve efficiency by increasing the number of automobiles produced using common vehicle platforms and by sharing research and development expenses for environmental and other technology, the desire to expand a company’s global presence through increased size and the desire to expand into particular segments or geographic markets.

Toyota believes that its research and development initiatives, particularly the development of environmentally friendly new vehicle technologies, vehicle safety and information technology, provide it with a strategic advantage.

Toyota’s ability to compete in the global automotive industry will depend in part on Toyota’s successful implementation of its business strategy. This is subject to a number of factors, some of which are not in Toyota’s control. These factors are discussed in “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects” and elsewhere in this annual report.

Toyota Global Vision

In March 2011, Toyota unveiled its “Toyota Global Vision” corporate outline for the future, which serves not only to give direction to Toyota employees around the world, but also to convey such direction to customers and to the public at large. Toyota will work to achieve sustained growth through the realization of the following ideals which are parts of the Vision:

Toyota Global Vision

Toyota will lead the way to the future of mobility, enriching lives around the world with the safest and most responsible ways of moving people.

Through our commitment to quality, constant innovation and respect for the planet, we aim to exceed expectations and be rewarded with a smile.

We will meet challenging goals by engaging the talent and passion of people, who believe there is always a better way.

“The safest and most responsible ways of moving people”

 

 	•	 	Safety is Toyota’s highest priority, and Toyota will continue to provide world-class safety.
 

 	•	 	Toyota will also continue to contribute to environmental quality and to human happiness by using leading environmental technology and by deploying that technology in a growing line of vehicle models. At the same time, Toyota will work through the provision of products, sales and services that exceed customer expectation to offer a rewarding experience for customers.
“Enriching lives around the world”

 

 	•	 	Toyota has been consistently true to its founding spirit of serving society through conscientious manufacturing, and it will continue working in that spirit to contribute to enhance the quality of life wherever it has operations.
 

 	•	 	Toyota will strive to continue contributing to economic vitality wherever it has operations by generating stable employment and by participating in mutually beneficial business relationships with dealers and suppliers. It will also strive to continue to actively engage in initiatives for human resources development and the promotion of cultural activities of its host communities.
 

11

Table of Contents
“Lead the way to the future of mobility”

 

 	•	 	Toyota will lead the industry in technological development that will spawn next-generation mobility. For example, it will explore possibilities in personal mobility and in the convergence of information technology for automobiles and “smart grids” for optimizing energy generation and consumption. Toyota will strive to offer products and services that match the needs in each market.
 

 	•	 	Toyota will strive to advance environmental technology and develop low-carbon technologies and technologies for maximizing safety through interaction with the transport infrastructure to lay a foundation for sustainable and amenable future mobility.
“Our commitment to quality, constant innovation”

 

 	•	 	Toyota is committed to providing quality vehicles that are highly reliable and driven with a sense of safety and reliability.
 

 	•	 	Toyota will constantly reinvent itself and continue to engage in cutting-edge technology development. Toyota will work towards offering vehicles around the world that address the needs of today and of tomorrow at affordable prices.
“Respect for the planet”

 

 	•	 	Toyota will continue working to minimize environmental impact in its manufacturing and other operations, as well as in its products.
 

 	•	 	Toyota’s activities will include conserving energy and reducing output of carbon dioxide, as well as conserving material resources through recycling; it will also include establishing mindsets and production methods appropriate for coexistence with nature.
“Exceed expectations and be rewarded with a smile”

 

 	•	 	Everyone at Toyota will continuously maintain a sense of gratitude to customers and will strive to earn smiles with products and services that are stimulating and inspiring and exceed customer expectations.
“There is always a better way”

 

 	•	 	All Toyota employees will share the recognition that there is always a better way and share a commitment to continuous improvement, which are fundamental to The Toyota Way.
“Meet challenging goals by engaging the talent and passion of people”

 

 	•	 	Toyota will nurture a corporate culture where teamwork and individual creativity thrive and where people will approach their work with pride and passion.
 

 	•	 	Toyota will honor the spirit of diversity in recruiting, training and promoting capable individuals around the world. Human resources development at Toyota will continue to promote the transfer of the company’s monozukuri spirit of conscientious manufacturing and related skills and know-how from one generation to the next.
Based on these initiatives, the Toyota group will contribute to “enriching lives of communities” by providing “ever-better cars.” This is expected to encourage more customers to purchase Toyota cars and thereby lead to the establishment of a stable business base. The automotive industry is facing a time of profound transformation that could happen only once in a hundred years in response to significant technological innovation such as electrification, connected vehicles and automated driving. Toyota is committed to realizing a mobility society of the future that enables everyone to enjoy freedom of movement beyond the conventional concept of vehicles.

 

12

Table of Contents
Toyota Environmental Challenge 2050

Positioning responding to environmental issues as one of the most prioritized challenges for management, Toyota has tackled head-on activities such as the development and promotion of next-generation vehicles including hybrid vehicles (“HVs”) and fuel cell vehicles (“FCVs”), efficient production that puts less of a burden on the environment, the recycling of end-of-life vehicles and hybrid vehicle batteries, planting trees for the coexistence of humans and nature in harmony, and conservation of ecosystems.

However, in recent years, the seriousness and reach of environmental issues has increased, as evidenced by global warming, water shortages, resource depletion, and degradation of biodiversity. In response to the situation, Toyota believes it is necessary to take on new challenges that consider the world 20 or 30 years in the future, in order to remain closely aligned with the global environment. Accordingly, Toyota announced Toyota Environmental Challenge 2050 in October 2015.

In order to contribute to the realization of a sustainable society, the Toyota Environmental Challenge 2050 has set forth the following six challenges for Toyota to address. Those challenges are to reduce CO2 emissions from driving and producing, as well as throughout the lifecycle of, vehicles, and to ensure a net positive impact on the Earth and society toward 2050.

 

 	1.	New Vehicle Zero CO2 Emissions Challenge
 

 	2.	Life Cycle Zero CO2 Emissions Challenge
 

 	3.	Plant Zero CO2 Emissions Challenge
 

 	4.	Challenge of Minimizing and Optimizing Water Usage
 

 	5.	Challenge of Establishing a Recycling-Based Society and Systems
 

 	6.	Challenge of Establishing a Future Society in Harmony with Nature
Further strengthening collaboration with the Toyota group and all other stakeholders, Toyota will consolidate new ideas, dynamism and technology to tackle together the realization of a truly sustainable society from a long-term perspective.

Automotive Operations

Toyota’s revenues from its automotive operations were ¥26,397.9 billion in fiscal 2018, ¥25,081.8 billion in fiscal 2017 and ¥25,977.4 billion in fiscal 2016.

Toyota produces and sells passenger vehicles, minivans and commercial vehicles such as trucks. Toyota Motor Corporation’s subsidiary, Daihatsu Motor Co., Ltd. (“Daihatsu”), produces and sells mini-vehicles and compact cars. Hino Motors, Ltd. (“Hino”), also a subsidiary of Toyota Motor Corporation, produces and sells commercial vehicles such as trucks and buses. Toyota also manufactures automotive parts, components and accessories for its own use and for sale to others.

With an aim to strengthen competitiveness in the small car segment, on January 29, 2016, Toyota and Daihatsu entered into a share exchange agreement to make Daihatsu a wholly-owned subsidiary of Toyota as of August 1, 2016. From January 2017, Toyota and Daihatsu established the “Emerging-market Compact Car Company” to promote development of competitive products in emerging markets. Through planning and implementation of optimal strategies including combining their technical expertise and bases of operations, bold cost reduction and expansion of product lineups with a global brand strategy, Daihatsu will play a key role in developing globally competitive small cars of both brands based on the technology Daihatsu has developed through manufacturing of mini-vehicles.

 

13

Table of Contents
Vehicle Models

Toyota’s vehicles (produced by Toyota, Daihatsu and Hino) can be classified into three categories: HVs, conventional engine vehicles, and FCVs. Toyota’s product line-up includes subcompact and compact cars, mini-vehicles, mid-size, luxury, sports and specialty cars, recreational and sport-utility vehicles, pickup trucks, minivans, trucks and buses.

Hybrid Vehicles

The world’s first mass-produced hybrid car was Toyota’s Prius. It runs on an efficient combination of a gasoline engine and motor. This system allows the Prius to travel more efficiently than conventional engine vehicles of comparable size and performance. The hybrid design of the Prius also results in the output of 75% less emission than the maximum amount allowed by Japanese environmental regulations. Toyota views the Prius as the cornerstone of its emphasis on designing and producing eco-friendly automobiles.

In the last three years, Toyota has strengthened its hybrid lineup by introducing the fully remodeled Alphard HV and Vellfire HV in January 2015, the Sienta HV in June 2015, the fully remodeled RX-HV in September 2015 and the fully remodeled Prius in November 2015, as well as adding Auris HV in April 2016, Prius PHV and the new model C-HR HV in October 2016, the new model LC HV in March 2017, the fully remodeled Camry HV in June 2017, the fully remodeled LS HV in October 2017, JPN TAXI, which employs a newly developed LPG HV, in October 2017, the fully remodeled Avalon HV in April 2018, the fully remodeled Corolla HB HV in May 2018 and the fully remodeled Crown HV and Century HV in June 2018. In the area of HVs, where strong growth is seen, Toyota aims to continue its efforts to offer a diverse line-up of HVs, enhance engine power while improving fuel economy and otherwise work towards increasing the sales of HVs.

Fuel Cell Vehicles

Toyota began limited sales of a fuel cell vehicle in Japan and the United States in December 2002. Since then, Toyota has made advances by solving technological issues such as the above and worked towards the practical use of such solutions, culminating in the general sale of the world’s first mass produced fuel cell vehicle MIRAI in Japan beginning in December 2014, in the United States beginning in June 2015 and in Europe beginning in September 2015. Toyota also launched “SORA,” the first production model fuel cell bus to receive vehicle type certification in Japan, in March 2018.

Conventional Engine Vehicles

Subcompact and Compact

Toyota’s subcompact and compact cars include the four-door Corolla sedan, which is one of Toyota’s bestselling models. The Yaris, marketed as the Vitz in Japan, is a subcompact car designed to perform better and offer greater comfort than other compact cars available in the market with low emissions that are particularly attractive to European consumers. In Europe, Toyota introduced the fully remodeled Aygo in June 2014. In Japan, Toyota introduced, in addition to the Corolla and Vitz, the Prius C (named Aqua in Japan), as well as Passo, Roomy and Tank, which three vehicles are OEM vehicles supplied by Daihatsu. In India, Asia, China and other markets, Toyota introduced the Etios and Vios, as well as the AGYA and Rush, which are designed and manufactured by Daihatsu, and Yaris iA, which is designed and manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation (“Mazda”).

Mini-Vehicles

Mini-vehicles are manufactured and sold by Daihatsu. Daihatsu manufactures mini-vehicles, passenger vehicles, commercial vehicles and auto parts. Mini-vehicles are passenger vehicles, vans or trucks with engine displacements of 660 cubic centimeters or less. Daihatsu sold approximately 586 thousand mini-vehicles and

 

14

Table of Contents
220 thousand automobiles on a consolidated basis during fiscal 2018. Daihatsu’s largest market is Japan, which accounted for approximately 80% of Daihatsu’s unit sales during fiscal 2018. From 2011, Toyota began to sell some mini-vehicles manufactured by Daihatsu under the Toyota brand.

Mid-Size

Toyota’s mid-size models include the Camry, which has been the bestselling passenger car in the United States for twenty of the past twenty-one calendar years (from 1997 to present) and also for the last sixteen consecutive years. The Camry was fully remodeled in June 2017. Camry sales in the United States for 2018 were approximately 387 thousand units (including Camry hybrids). In addition, Toyota’s other mid-size models include the REIZ for the Chinese market and the Avensis for the European market.

Luxury and Large

In North America, Europe, Japan and other regions, Toyota’s luxury lineup consists primarily of vehicles sold under the Lexus brand name. Lexus passenger car models include the LS, the GS, the ES, the IS, the CT, the LC and the RC. Lexus models also include the LX, the GX, the RX and the NX sold as luxury sport-utility vehicles. Toyota commenced sales of its luxury automobiles in Japan under the Lexus brand in August 2005. As of March 31, 2018, the Lexus brand lineup in Japan includes the LS, the GS, the IS, the CT, the LX, the RX, the NX, the LC and the RC. The Toyota brand’s full-size luxury car, the Avalon, was remodeled in April 2018, and the Crown was fully remodeled in June 2018. Toyota also fully remodeled the Century limousine in Japan in June 2018.

Sports and Specialty

In April 2012, Toyota introduced the 86 (called Scion FR-S in the U.S.), a compact sports car with a front-mounted engine and rear-wheel drive. In October 2014, Toyota introduced the RC coupe that leads the image of Lexus, which engages drivers on a sentimental level. In March 2017, Toyota introduced LC, the new model flagship coupe for Lexus.

Recreational and Sport-Utility Vehicles and Pickup Trucks

Toyota sells a variety of sport-utility vehicles and pickup trucks. Toyota’s sport-utility vehicles available in North America include the Sequoia, the 4Runner, the RAV4, the Highlander, the FJ Cruiser and the Land Cruiser, and pickup trucks available are the Tacoma and Tundra. The Tacoma, the Tundra, the Highlander and the Sequoia are manufactured in the United States. Toyota also offers four types of sport-utility vehicles under the Lexus brand, including the LX, the GX, the RX, and the NX. Toyota also manufactures the RX and RAV4 models in Canada. Toyota’s pickup truck, the Hilux, has been the bestselling model of all Toyota cars sold in Thailand. In July 2014, Toyota introduced the new NX model under the Lexus brand. In May 2015, Toyota introduced the fully remodeled Hilux and in September 2015, it introduced the fully remodeled RX of the Lexus brand. In December 2016, Toyota introduced C-HR, a model with a focus on both design and drive.

Minivans and Cabwagons

Toyota offers several basic models for the global minivan market. Its largest minivans in Japan, the Alphard and the Vellfire, were remodeled in January 2015. In addition, the Noah/Voxy was remodeled in January 2014 and the new model Esquire was introduced in October 2014 in Japan. The new model Calya, an original equipment manufacturing (“OEM”) vehicle by Daihatsu, was introduced in July 2016 in Indonesia. Toyota’s other minivan models include, in Japan, the Estima and the Sienta, and, in North America, the Sienna.

Trucks and Buses

Toyota’s product lineup includes trucks (including vans) up to a gross vehicle weight of five tons and micro-buses that are sold in Japan and in overseas markets. Toyota launched “SORA,” a production model fuel cell bus,

 

15

Table of Contents
in Japan in March 2018. Trucks and buses are also manufactured and sold by Hino, a subsidiary of Toyota. Hino’s product lineup includes large trucks with a gross vehicle weight of over eleven tons, medium trucks with a gross vehicle weight of between five and eleven tons and small trucks with a gross vehicle weight of up to five tons. Hino’s bus lineup includes medium to large buses used primarily as tour buses and public buses, as well as small buses and micro-buses.

Product Development

New cars introduced in Japan during fiscal 2018 and thereafter include the Hilux, the JPN TAXI and TOYOTA driving school vehicles. The remodeled car in Japan during fiscal 2018 and thereafter is the Camry HV. Remodeled cars outside of Japan during fiscal 2018 and thereafter include the Lexus LS, the Avalon and the Camry.

In addition, the IMV product lineup based on the IMV project to optimize global manufacturing and supply systems is a lineup of strategic multipurpose vehicles produced from a single platform to meet market demand. The IMV product lineup includes, as of March 31, 2017, the Hilux, Fortuner, and Innova, one or all of which are available in all regions.Toyota and its affiliated companies produce automobiles and related parts and components through more than 50 overseas manufacturing companies in 26 countries and regions besides Japan. Toyota’s major manufacturing facilities include plants in Japan, the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, France, Turkey, Thailand, China, Taiwan, India, Indonesia, South Africa, Argentina and Brazil. Daihatsu brand vehicles are produced at 4 factories in Japan and 2 manufacturing companies in 2 other countries of Indonesia and Malaysia. Hino brand vehicles are produced at 2 factories in Japan and 10 manufacturing companies in 10 countries, including Indonesia and Thailand. For a listing of Toyota’s principal production facilities, see “Information on the Company — Property, Plants and Equipment.”

In promoting a sustainable growth strategy, establishing a system capable of providing optimal supply of products in the global market is integral to Toyota’s strategy.

In line with its basic policy of manufacturing in countries or regions where there is demand and where Toyota is truly competitive, Toyota will make efficient use of and maximize capacity utilization at its existing plants to respond to the expanding market and will continue to focus on making efficient capital investments as necessary. Furthermore, Toyota will continue to place top priority on safety and quality in strengthening true competitiveness with the aim of achieving sustainable growth.

In 2017, 75.9% of Toyota vehicles sold in overseas markets were manufactured in overseas plants by Toyota and its unconsolidated affiliated companies. In 2017, approximately 71.1% of Toyota vehicles sold in North America were produced in North America. Of the vehicles sold in Europe in 2017, approximately 81.5% were produced in Europe. In fiscal 2018, Toyota produced on a consolidated basis 4,286 thousand vehicles in Japan and 4,678 thousand vehicles overseas, compared to 4,109 thousand vehicles in Japan and 4,866 thousand vehicles overseas in fiscal 2017.

 

23

Table of Contents
The following table shows Toyota’s worldwide vehicle unit production by geographic market for the periods shown. These production figures do not include vehicles produced by Toyota’s unconsolidated affiliated companies. The sales unit information elsewhere in this annual report includes sales of vehicles produced by these affiliated companies. Vehicles produced by Daihatsu and Hino are included in the vehicle production figures set forth below.Improving Efficiency

Toyota is working on the following to create a corporate structure allowing for efficient development, production and sales that can respond flexibly to changes in the external environment:

 

 	•	 	working with suppliers as one team to dramatically increase the efficiency of development;
 

 	•	 	creating a production structure that can better withstand fluctuations in demand and currency exchange rates; and
 

 	•	 	strengthening sales capabilities in line with local conditions.
Toyota also plans to improve profitability and enhance operating efficiency by continuing to pursue aggressive cost reduction programs, including:

 

 	•	 	improving product development and production efficiencies through the re-integration and improvement of vehicle platforms and power trains as well as through the development of electronic platforms which organize electronic devices of vehicles as a package and standardize electronic structure and infrastructure;
 

 	•	 	reinforcing and promoting Ryohin-Renka Cost Innovation (“RR-CI”) activity, which aims for the elimination of waste in all processes from design to production while ensuring the reliability and safety of each part;
 

 	•	 	applying advanced information technologies to improve efficiency throughout the product development and production processes;
 

 	•	 	globally reinforcing the supply base under an open and fair purchasing policy;
 

 	•	 	streamlining production systems; and
 

 	•	 	improving the efficiency of domestic and international distribution.
Toyota is further improving production efficiency by installing more versatile equipment and systems, modifying vehicle body designs to allow for a greater variety of models on each production line and sharing more parts among vehicles, not simply among different models but also among different platforms.

In April 2012, Toyota announced a new development framework, the TNGA, which reconciles sweeping advances in product appeal with cost reductions. The new framework sets forth an architecture that incorporates not only the three fundamental vehicle functions of moving, turning and stopping, but also ergonomics such as driving position as well as freedom of design. Toyota plans to efficiently develop cars with high basic-performance attributes by developing parts and modules based on this architecture. The TNGA provides for

 

26

Table of Contents
handling multiple models simultaneously in grouped development projects that will increase the sharing of parts and core vehicle components. This sharing, carried out in cooperation with suppliers, will result in lowered costs, thereby allowing developmental manpower and funds to be reinvested in R&D to meet consumer preferences and R&D to meet regional needs, resulting in further product improvement.

By April 2013, Toyota established systems to rapidly promote the TNGA and carried out product development under this new way of doing business. As a result, Toyota realized high basic performance and marketability in the Prius that was introduced in Japan in December 2015. Toyota subsequently launched the all-new Camry in 2017. Toyota has rolled out, and plans to continue to roll out, the results of such development to other vehicles as well.

Realizing a Smart Mobility Society that expands through connected car technologies

Toyota is moving forward with initiatives striving to realize a smart mobility society, in which people can enjoy freedom of movement and feel at ease and excited, by connecting vehicles, people and communities with its connected car technologies in order to meet the needs of rapidly changing societies, including the falling birth rate and aging populations in developed nations, an increasingly diverse range of energy sources and the evolution of IoT, among others. In particular, Toyota aims to contribute to an affluent lifestyle that offers peace of mind by enhancing vehicle functionality that will increase the attractiveness of vehicles and the excitement of driving, enhancing transport systems that make being in cars more comfortable and more environmentally friendly, and realizing Smart Communities that aim for optimization of local energy use and establishment of a low-carbon emission transportation system.

Enhancing Vehicle Functionality — Information Service Functions

To Toyota, enhancing vehicle functionality means advancing information service functions that integrate vehicles with telecommunication systems, and driving assistance functions that use communication technologies and sensor technologies to create vehicles with intelligent features. Information service functions can improve convenience and enrich the driving experience through information communication technologies that add new functions that are connected to the basic vehicle functions of “running, turning and stopping.” Examples include the following:

 

 	•	 	Toyota is advancing enhancement of car navigation systems, such as car parking maps that display detailed information inside car parks, as well as the VICS system (Vehicle Information and Communication System) that provides real-time road traffic information such as congestion, accidents, traffic restrictions and parking. Car navigation systems play an increasingly important role in providing drivers with various types of information on safety, smooth traveling, comfort and convenience.
 

 	•	 	T-Connect/G-BOOK is the latest information network service that merges the latest network technologies and car multimedia a step ahead of the arrival of the ubiquitous network society. T-Connect/G-BOOK provides various types of information useful for driving, as well as safety and security services that detect unusual conditions in the vehicle, thereby supporting a lifestyle with one’s vehicles anytime and anywhere through a network. In 2005, Toyota started G-BOOK ALPHA and G-Link for Lexus, each with additional various features including traffic congestion forecast service. In 2007, Toyota launched G-BOOK mX, which in addition to the well-received conventional safety and security services of G-BOOK, introduced even more useful car navigation services such as “Map-on-Demand” — the world’s first technology for automatically updating map data — and “Probe Communication Traffic Information” that provides drivers with highly precise information on traffic congestion. In 2014, Toyota launched T-Connect, which in addition to conventional telematics services, provides new services and functions through the distribution of applications to on-board device, as well as destination and other information searches through the adoption of a voice recognition system.
 

 	•	 	
HELPNET is an emergency dial system that, in the event of a traffic accident or medical emergency, transmits information required for emergency rescue, such as present-location data and vehicle details,

 

27

Table of Contents
 	
either automatically or with the touch of a button. It immediately contacts police and fire departments through the HELPNET Operation Center. This system is integrated into T-Connect/G-BOOK and G-Link to improve the quality of services. HELPNET shortens the time taken to report following an emergency situation, which contributes to decreasing the number of traffic accident fatalities and reducing the level of impact, while at the same time aiming to prevent secondary disasters and ease traffic congestion.

In addition to the above, Toyota also operates a Japanese-language web portal for automobile information, GAZOO.com. The name “GAZOO” originates from the Japanese word gazo, meaning images. GAZOO was established as an Internet membership service linking Toyota, its national dealer network and GAZOO members, and has provided information on new and used Toyota vehicles and related services, as well as online shopping services. GAZOO later expanded to include information on other automakers, as well as a rich blog feature as a social networking portal site on automobiles. In addition, GAZOO has exhanced its contents line-up through which Toyota aims to expand the fan base of car enthusiasts by promoting activities where customers can experience in real life the enjoyment that cars offer, such as TOYOTA GAZOO Racing. GAZOO is currently in charge of all Toyota motor sports activities (such as WRC, WEC and SuperGT). Toyota utilized its GAZOO technology that links the customers, distributors and Toyota to further expand its automobile information service by launching the G-BOOK telematics service in Japan in fall 2002 and G-Link, which is a service exclusive to Lexus, in August 2005. Toyota also offers a theft detection system, vehicle tracking service and operator support service as standard services to enhance services aiming to provide safety, security and comfort for T-Connect/G-BOOK and G-Link users in their lifestyle using vehicles. With G-BOOK mX announced in April 2007, Toyota started offering services that allow drivers to use more convenient navigation systems such as “Map-on-Demand” — the world’s first technology for automatically updating map data. In addition, Toyota has further strengthened its linkage between GAZOO and G-BOOK and has, for example, allowed map information searched on a blog on GAZOO.com to be used on G-BOOK, further maturing as a comprehensive telematics service. In Japan, Toyota is seeking to promote the use of the T-Connect/G-BOOK by equipping all Lexus models and certain Crown models with the T-Connect/G-BOOK as a standard feature. Toyota has also licensed its T-Connect/G-BOOK technology to certain other competitors in Japan. Toyota is applying the technology and experience which it has accumulated in Japan to regions outside Japan; G-BOOK services were introduced in China in March 2009, and unique telematics services in the United States were launched in August 2009. In addition, Toyota began offering telematics services for smartphones in December 2010 in Japan, and began to offer the same service in Thailand in March 2012 and the Middle East from January 2014 (UAE, Qatar and Lebanon in January 2014, Saudi Arabia in August 2014, Bahrain in October 2014 and Kuwait in January 2015).

In addition, in March 2004, Toyota launched its CRM (Customer Relationship Management) system called e-CRB (evolutionary Customer Relationship Building) in Thailand. e-CRB builds on a technology cultivated through the development of Gazoo and G-BOOK and offers its customers a variety of services such as providing information on new vehicles, accepting requests for brochures and estimates and notifying customers when it is time for maintenance by keeping track of the vehicle’s maintenance history and mileage. In addition, e-CRB offers an advanced operation system that can be utilized comprehensively at dealers including new and used cars and services. Toyota is promoting e-CRB in countries such as China, Thailand, Australia, India and Brazil where steady progress has been made as the service-in ratio has increased. In 2013, Toyota introduced the next-generation e-CRB that adopts tablet terminals (portable information processing terminals) in China. These tablet terminals are supporting the improvement of customer satisfaction at points of sale and in after-sale service.

Toyota also introduced a system called Sales Logistics Integrated Management (“SLIM”) in Guangzhou, China and India. By utilizing real sales information and linking with production and distribution, Toyota is able to realize the Just-in-Time production system of producing and delivering only the number of vehicles that have been sold. SLIM has been recognized to significantly increase the freshness of inventory and improve cash flow.

In September 2010, Toyota announced its smart-grid initiatives, which are intended to demonstrate efficient energy use toward the realization of a low-carbon and energy-saving society. By utilizing technology cultivated

 

28

Table of Contents
through the Internet and telematics services mentioned above, Toyota developed the Toyota Smart Center (“TSC”) that optimally controls electricity and links EVs and PHVs with homes, and conducted a demonstration project in Rokkasho Village in Aomori aimed at reducing overall CO2 emissions and users’ electricity costs. In addition, in order to develop a global platform of the TSC, Toyota announced a partnership with Microsoft Corp. in April 2011 and a partnership with Salesforce.com in May 2011. Toyota plans to utilize the cloud technology of these two companies in its Internet and telematics services to build a framework for TSC’s global implementation. In January 2012, Toyota began eConnect and “TOYOTA friend” services for PHV. In May 2013, Toyota utilized the latest version of Microsoft’s SharePoint to comprehensively redesign GAZOO, the automobile information portal site. Toyota aims to offer new services, achieve better vehicle quality and enhance product attractiveness as well as contribute further to society by utilizing the vehicle information, road conditions and other parameters collected via telematics services and stored at the TSC. With regard to contribution to society, Toyota began offering the Big Data Traffic Information Service in June 2013, through which traffic information, statistics and other related information are provided to local governments, universities and businesses to support traffic flow improvement and assist disaster prevention measures. In December 2016, Toyota launched the TC Smartphone Navigation free-of-charge to users, including those other than Toyota users, to provide readily usable route history maps. Toyota plans to continue to work with new information technologies and the IT industry to establish a framework for TSC’s global implementation and to realize a mobility society of the future.

In 2016, Toyota has been working actively on “connected car technology” and alliances with other companies for effective vehicle data utilization to “make ever-better cars” and for safer and securer “connected” service. In January 2016, Toyota announced a “connected vehicle framework” to increase installation of a Data Communication Module (DCM) into a broader range of its vehicles starting in the United States from 2017. In April 2016, Toyota established a new company, “Toyota Connected, Inc.,” in the United States to consolidate and analyze information collected from vehicles and to develop new products, and thereby promoting “making ever-better cars” through utilizing big data. In addition, Toyota is collaborating with insurance companies on developing insurance services as well as tying up with a sharing service company, thereby actively advancing research for new services and the realization of a mobility society utilizing big data.

As a further engagement in the insurance industry, Toyota established Toyota Insurance Management Solutions USA, LLC (“TIMS”), a new U.S. telematics car insurance services company, to promote analysis of big data and development of algorithms. TIMS provides telematics insurance services best suited to Toyota’s customers by consolidating Toyota’s data, financing and insurance knowhow.

In November 2016, based on the proliferation and popularity of mobility services such as car-sharing, Toyota started to establish the Mobility Services Platform (“MSPF”), which has various functions to support mobility services, leveraging the TSC, the Toyota Big Data Center, and financial services. MSPF is a platform that aggregates and covers individual business functions, such as vehicle management systems and leasing programs, that Toyota developed and offered to mobility service providers such as ridesharing operators when working together with them. As one example of the functions that MSPF offers, to enhance a MSPF-based car-sharing, Toyota developed the smart key box (“SKB”) that enables users to lock and unlock doors and to start the engine with their smartphone — thus providing a safer and more secure way of lending and renting cars. Using the MSPF and SKB, Toyota started a pilot program in collaboration with Getaround, a venture company providing car-sharing services targeted at individuals in the United States, in March 2017 in San Francisco, California. In addition, Toyota is working with Toyota Financial Services Corporation (“TFSC”) to make vehicles with expired leases available on Getaround, in order to effectively utilize TFSC’s assets. Toyota is also examining the viability of car sharing using SKBs. Furthermore, Servco Pacific Inc., a Toyota dealer in Hawaii, has begun an employee-only car-sharing services program.

Toyota and Uber Technologies, Inc. have entered into a memorandum of understanding to explore collaboration with respect to ridesharing. As part of the partnership, the companies created new leasing options in which car purchasers can lease vehicles with connected terminals from Toyota Financial Services and cover their

 

29

Table of Contents
payments through earnings generated as Uber drivers. In Southeast Asia, Toyota started to collaborate with Grab, Inc. (“Grab”) in August 2017, and commenced a pilot program in Singapore to collect driving data generated from vehicles owned by Grab. In June 2018, Toyota further expanded the collaboration and invested in Grab. Toyota is moving forward with providing various connected services that use MSPF to Grab, and will consider future collaboration with Grab in the area of Mobility as a Service (“MaaS”).

Toyota and Japan Federation of Hire-Taxi Associations have entered into a memorandum of understanding to explore areas for collaboration, so as to develop and introduce the “Japanese taxi of the future.” Through use of taxis to collect and analyze of information concerning the road traffic environment, and applying those results to the development of the Mobility Teammate Concept, which embodies Toyota’s vision of automated driving, Toyota and the Japan Federation of Hire-Taxi Associations will continue to be important partners in helping to develop Japanese taxis into the “world’s safest, most pleasant, world-class public transportation service” and to strengthen the Japanese transportation infrastructure.

With the background of expanding mobility services and the tightening of data regulations in Europe, Toyota has established Toyota Connected Europe, and plans to utilize MSPF in Europe as well to promote car-sharing businesses in coordination with local dealers.

In January 2018, Toyota announced the e-Palette Concept, a next generation EV designed exclusively for MaaS, leveraging electrification, connected vehicles and automated driving technologies. The e-Palette Concept can be adapted for various services, such as passenger transportation, logistics services or retail services, and is the embodiment of Toyota’s concept of “new mobility” that supports the lifestyles of its customers. Amazon.com, Inc., DiDi Chuxing, Pizza Hut, LLC, Uber Technologies, Inc. and Mazda Motor Corporation are collaborating with Toyota as initial launch partners in order to explore vehicle specifications that are even more practical and to ensure the realization of a new mobility service.

Enhancing Vehicle Functionality — Driving Assistance Functions

Toyota’s driving assistance functions offer functions that assist drivers with an aim to lessen the burden of driving, enhance safety and provide to everyone the pleasure of driving. Toyota has commercialized enhancements to various functions that assist the driver in sensing external information, avoiding danger and making appropriate maneuvers. Examples of driving assistance functions include the following:

 

 	•	 	VDIM (Vehicle Dynamics Integrated Management) is a system that constantly monitors the driver’s operations and the vehicle’s situation and centrally manages the engine, steering mechanisms and brakes. By stabilizing the vehicle before the driver loses control of the vehicle, VDIM achieves a high level of ‘active safety’ and improves driving performance, consisting namely of running, turning and stopping.
 

 	•	 	“Pre-collision System” is a system that perceives possibilities of a crash with obstacles, cars in front or crossing pedestrians through a sensor installed in a vehicle. If a collision seems likely, it proceeds to activate warnings as well as brake assistance, which aids the driver’s operation of the brake, or the automatic braking system, which aids in avoiding the collision altogether or mitigates any damage.
 

 	•	 	“Radar Cruise Control (with all-speed tracking function)” allows the vehicle to keep a constant distance between itself and the preceding vehicle within a speed range from zero to a preset speed, automatically slowing down and stopping if necessary to avoid collision. When the car in front speeds up, it allows the driver to accelerate.
 

 	•	 	“Lane Departure Alert” is a system that uses a camera to detect white or yellow lane markers while driving. The system warns the driver with a buzzer and displays if it detects possible deviation in order to assist in avoiding a collision accident resulting from deviation. In addition, “Lane Keeping Assist System,” a system that assists the driver’s operation of the steering wheel with electric power steering in order to help keep the vehicle traveling between lane markers, has been developed.
 

30

Table of Contents
 	•	 	“Automatic High Beam” detects the headlights of oncoming vehicles or taillights of vehicles running in front and adjusts the headlight range, automatically switching to low beam or high beam, in order to avoid dazzling the visions of the drivers with bright lights, as well as to secure the drivers’ forward visions at night.
 

 	•	 	“Blind Spot Monitor” is a system which aims to reduce accidents by alerting the driver to other vehicles in the driver’s blind spot diagonally behind the driver’s seat with sound and visual display in the side mirrors while changing lanes.
From these driving assistance functions, in 2015 Toyota commercialized the Toyota Safety Sense, a collision avoidance support package that includes the Pre-collision System, the Lane Departure Alert and the Automatic High Beam. By the end of 2017, Toyota had completed installation of this package on nearly all models sold in Japan, the United States and Europe at an affordable price aimed at widespread adaption.

Enhancing Transport Systems

Enhancing transport systems requires taking a general approach that addresses various factors across a wide scope that are pertinent not only to vehicles but also roads, people and public transport systems in order to ensure smooth and efficient movement of people and vehicles and to build a safe transportation environment. In addition to VICS and ETC (Electronic Toll Collection System), which are already standard in Japan, the “Cooperative ITS,” which combines cutting edge IT and vehicle technology, is in development and has begun to be partially implemented.

 

 	•	 	The operation of “ETC2.0” commenced in 2009 and corresponding products are available for purchase. Mainly for use on highways, this service provides drivers with information related to road traffic and safe driving that is transmitted from road infrastructures to car navigation systems via video and voice.
 

 	•	 	In the summer of 2011, Toyota introduced products corresponding to the driving safety support system, “DSSS,” which the National Police Agency has started operating. Mainly for use on general roads, this system supports safe driving, including by preventing the driver from overlooking red lights, by transmitting traffic control information (such as traffic lights and signs) and peripheral information from road infrastructures to automobiles.
 

 	•	 	Aiming at further reducing accidents, “ITS Connect,” a driving safety support system that uses a dedicated ITS frequency of 760 MHz, was introduced in the fall of 2015. Through direct and continuous exchange of information between vehicles and the road and among vehicles, this system aims to mitigate accidents near intersections, which have been difficult to mitigate to date. The system also includes Communicating Radar Cruise Control features, which supports smooth acceleration and deceleration when following behind another vehicle. In addition, from August 2017, Toyota and Mazda started a partnership in the field of advanced safety technologies and a collaboration in Toyota’s vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-infrastructure technologies, and aims at the realization of automated driving in which all drivers can move safely, smoothly and freely by harmonizing ITS technology and vehicle control technology.
Toyota is committed to developing new ITS products. Toyota believes that intelligent transport systems will become an integral part of its overall automotive operations and enhance the competitiveness of its vehicles. As familiarity with and demand for ITS products grow, Toyota expects an increasing number of ITS products to become commercially available and achieve greater acceptance each year.

Smart Communities

In April 2010, Toyota City was selected as a “Model Region for Next-Generation Energy Systems” by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. Toyota since joined the “Toyota City Low-Carbon Society Verification Council” (established in August 2010), and carried out experiments relating to the “Optimization of

 

31

Table of Contents
Local Energy Use in Households and Destinations (commercial and public facilities)” and “Establishment of a System for Low-Carbon Emission Transportation” until March 2015. As a way of building on the results of such experiments, Toyota launched an experimental ultra-compact electric vehicle sharing program in Tokyo from April 2015. It also launched an experimental ultra-compact electric vehicle program for tourism using a Toyota developed car-sharing system in Okinawa from January 2016. An experimental car-sharing program was also implemented in Okayama City from October through December 2016, and from October 2017 through January 2018. Furthermore, in Toyota City and Okinawa, these experimental programs were commercialized, and management was transferred to local companies and organizations in April 2017.

Research and Development of, and Collaboration Regarding, Connected Platforms

With respect to research and development of platform technologies to make connected services a reality in the future, Toyota is moving forward with the following research and development activities related to in-vehicle system technologies as well as telecommunication and data processing system technologies by means of both open collaboration led by a nonprofit organization as well as collaboration with certain other companies.

For in-vehicle system technologies, a collaborative open source project is underway to develop an operating system for in-vehicle multimedia telematics systems based on the open source software Linux, but incorporating in-vehicle requirements. Named Automotive Grade Linux, the operating system is being developed in collaboration with other auto companies as well as companies that design a manufacture the hardware and software for devices that make up in-vehicle systems, under the initiative of Linux Foundation, an incorporated nonprofit organization. With respect to functions that link in-vehicle multimedia system to smartphones, Toyota established a nonprofit organization called Smart Device Link Consortium in November 2016, jointly with Ford and certain other auto companies, to develop specifications for in-vehicle multimedia systems and their related platform software.

For telecommunication and server system technologies, Toyota is developing a “global mobile communications platform,” which allows for globally integrated management of the telecommunication environment, in collaboration with KDDI Corporation. Toyota is also conducting research and development jointly with the NTT Group in the areas of data processing system technologies and mobile communications technologies that will enable the processing of big data obtained from vehicles in the future.